[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 1. The Basics
현재 소단원: 1.6 Bipartite graphs
직전 소단원: 「1.5 Trees and forests」
[본문]
1.6 Bipartite graphs
17
1.6 Bipartite graphs
Let r > 2 be an integer. A graph G = (V, E) is called r-partite if V
r-partite
admits a partition into r classes such that every edge has its ends in dif-
ferent classes: vertices in the same partition class must not be adjacent.
Instead of ‘2-partite’ one usually says bipartite.
bipartite
K2,2,2 = K3
2
Fig. 1.6.1. Two 3-partite graphs
An r-partite graph in which every two vertices from di↵erent par-
tition classes are adjacent is called complete; the complete r-partite
complete
r-partite
graphs for all r together are the complete multipartite graphs.
The
complete r-partite graph Kn1 ⇤. . . ⇤Knr is denoted by Kn1,...,nr; if
Kn1,...,nr
n1 = . . . = nr =: s, we abbreviate this to Kr
s. Thus, Kr
s is the complete
Kr
s
r-partite graph in which every partition class contains exactly s vertices.6
(Figure 1.6.1 shows the example of the octahedron K3
2; compare its draw-
ing with that in Figure 1.4.3.) Graphs of the form K1,n are called stars;
star
the vertex in the singleton partition class of this K1,n is the star’s centre.
centre
=
=
Fig. 1.6.2. Three drawings of the bipartite graph K3,3 = K2
3
Clearly, a bipartite graph cannot contain an odd cycle, a cycle of odd
odd cycle
length. In fact, the bipartite graphs are characterized by this property:
Proposition 1.6.1. A graph is bipartite if and only if it contains no
[1.9.4]
[5.3.1]
[6.4.2]
odd cycle.
6 Note that we obtain a Kr
s if we replace each vertex of a Kr by an independent
s-set; our notation of Kr
s is intended to hint at this connection.

18
1. The Basics
Proof. Let G = (V, E) be a graph without odd cycles; we show that G is
(1.5.1)
bipartite. Clearly a graph is bipartite if all its components are bipartite
or trivial, so we may assume that G is connected. Let T be a spanning
tree in G, pick a root r 2 T, and denote the associated tree-order on V
by 6T . For each v 2 V , the unique path rTv has odd or even length.
This deﬁnes a bipartition of V ; we show that G is bipartite with this
partition.
e
Ce
r
x
y
Fig. 1.6.3. The cycle Ce in T + e
Let e = xy be an edge of G.
If e 2 T, with x <T y say, then
rTy = rTxy and so x and y lie in di↵erent partition classes. If e /2 T
then Ce := xTy + e is a cycle (Fig. 1.6.3), and by the case treated
already the vertices along xTy alternate between the two classes. Since
Ce is even by assumption, x and y again lie in di↵erent classes.
⇤
1.7 Contraction and minors
In Section 1.1 we saw two fundamental containment relations between
graphs: the ‘subgraph’ relation, and the ‘induced subgraph’ relation. In
this section we meet two more: the ‘minor’ relation, and the ‘topological
minor’ relation. Let X be a ﬁxed graph.
A subdivision of X is, informally, any graph obtained from X by
‘subdividing’ some or all of its edges by drawing new vertices on those
edges.
In other words, we replace some edges of X with new paths
subdivision
TX of X
between their ends, so that none of these paths has an inner vertex in
V (X) or on another new path. When G is a subdivision of X, we also
say that G is a TX.7 The original vertices of X are the branch vertices
branch
vertices
of the TX; its new vertices are called subdividing vertices. Note that
7 The ‘T’ stands for ‘topological’. Although, formally, TX denotes a whole class
of graphs, the class of all subdivisions of X, it is customary to use the expression as
indicated to refer to an arbitrary member of that class.
