[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 1. The Basics
현재 소단원: 1.7 Contraction and minors
직전 소단원: 「1.6 Bipartite graphs」
[본문]
18
1. The Basics
Proof. Let G = (V, E) be a graph without odd cycles; we show that G is
(1.5.1)
bipartite. Clearly a graph is bipartite if all its components are bipartite
or trivial, so we may assume that G is connected. Let T be a spanning
tree in G, pick a root r 2 T, and denote the associated tree-order on V
by 6T . For each v 2 V , the unique path rTv has odd or even length.
This deﬁnes a bipartition of V ; we show that G is bipartite with this
partition.
e
Ce
r
x
y
Fig. 1.6.3. The cycle Ce in T + e
Let e = xy be an edge of G.
If e 2 T, with x <T y say, then
rTy = rTxy and so x and y lie in di↵erent partition classes. If e /2 T
then Ce := xTy + e is a cycle (Fig. 1.6.3), and by the case treated
already the vertices along xTy alternate between the two classes. Since
Ce is even by assumption, x and y again lie in di↵erent classes.
⇤
1.7 Contraction and minors
In Section 1.1 we saw two fundamental containment relations between
graphs: the ‘subgraph’ relation, and the ‘induced subgraph’ relation. In
this section we meet two more: the ‘minor’ relation, and the ‘topological
minor’ relation. Let X be a ﬁxed graph.
A subdivision of X is, informally, any graph obtained from X by
‘subdividing’ some or all of its edges by drawing new vertices on those
edges.
In other words, we replace some edges of X with new paths
subdivision
TX of X
between their ends, so that none of these paths has an inner vertex in
V (X) or on another new path. When G is a subdivision of X, we also
say that G is a TX.7 The original vertices of X are the branch vertices
branch
vertices
of the TX; its new vertices are called subdividing vertices. Note that
7 The ‘T’ stands for ‘topological’. Although, formally, TX denotes a whole class
of graphs, the class of all subdivisions of X, it is customary to use the expression as
indicated to refer to an arbitrary member of that class.

1.7 Contraction and minors
19
subdividing vertices have degree 2, while branch vertices retain their
degree from X.
If a graph Y contains a TX as a subgraph, then X is a topological
minor of Y (Fig. 1.7.1).
topological
minor
X
G
Y
Fig. 1.7.1. The graph G is a TX, a subdivision of X.
As G ✓Y , this makes X a topological minor of Y .
Similarly, replacing the vertices x of X with disjoint connected
graphs Gx, and the edges xy of X with non-empty sets of Gx– Gy edges,
yields a graph that we shall call an IX.8 More formally, a graph G is
an IX if its vertex set admits a partition { Vx | x 2 V (X) } into con-
IX
nected subsets Vx such that distinct vertices x, y 2 X are adjacent in X
if and only if G contains a Vx–Vy edge. The sets Vx are the branch sets
branch sets
of the IX. Conversely, we say that X arises from G by contracting the
subgraphs Gx and call it a contraction minor of G.
contraction
If a graph Y contains an IX as a subgraph, then X is a minor of Y,
minor, 4
the IX is a model of X in Y, and we write X 4 Y (Fig. 1.7.2).
model
X
Y
Vx
Vz
x
z
G
Fig. 1.7.2. The graph G is a model of X in Y, which makes X
a minor of Y.
Thus, X is a minor of Y if and only if there is a map ' from a
subset of V (Y ) onto V (X) such that for every vertex x 2 X its inverse
image '−1(x) is connected in Y and for every edge xx0 2 X there is an
8 The ‘I’ stands for ‘inﬂated’. As before, while IX is formally a class of graphs,
those admitting a vertex partition { Vx | x 2 V (X) } as described below, we use the
expression as indicated to refer to an arbitrary member of that class.

20
1. The Basics
edge in Y between the branch sets '−1(x) and '−1(x0) of its ends. If
the domain of ' is all of V (Y ), and xx0 2 X whenever x 6= x0 and Y has
an edge between '−1(x) and '−1(x0) (so that Y is an IX), we call ' a
contraction of Y onto X.
contraction
Since branch sets can be singletons, every subgraph of a graph is
also its minor. In inﬁnite graphs, branch sets are allowed to be inﬁnite
unless speciﬁed otherwise. For example, the graph shown in Figure 8.1.1
is an IX with X an inﬁnite star.
Proposition 1.7.1. The minor relation 4 and the topological-minor
[12.6.1]
relation are partial orderings on the class of ﬁnite graphs, i.e. they are
reﬂexive, antisymmetric and transitive.
⇤
If G is an IX, then P = { Vx | x 2 X } is a partition of V (G), and we
write X =: G/P for this contraction minor of G. If U = Vx is the only
G/P
non-singleton branch set, we write X =: G/U, write vU for the vertex
G/U
x 2 X to which U contracts, and think of the rest of X as an induced
vU
subgraph of G. The ‘smallest’ non-trivial case of this is that U contains
exactly two vertices forming an edge e, so that U = e. We then say that
X = G/e arises from G by contracting the edge e; see Figure 1.7.3.
contracting
an edge
x
y
e
ve
G/e
G
Fig. 1.7.3. Contracting the edge e = xy
Since the minor relation is transitive, every sequence of single vertex
or edge deletions or contractions yields a minor. Conversely, every minor
of a given ﬁnite graph can be obtained in this way:
Corollary 1.7.2. Let X and Y be ﬁnite graphs. X is a minor of Y if
and only if there are graphs G0, . . . , Gn such that G0 = Y and Gn = X
and each Gi+1 arises from Gi by deleting an edge, contracting an edge,
or deleting a vertex.
Proof. Induction on |Y | + kY k.
⇤
Finally, we have the following relationship between minors and to-
pological minors:

21
Proposition 1.7.3.
[4.4.2]
[7.3.1]
[12.7.3]
(i) Every TX is also an IX (Fig. 1.7.4); thus, every topological minor
of a graph is also its (ordinary) minor.
(ii) If ∆(X) 6 3, then every IX contains a TX; thus, every minor
with maximum degree at most 3 of a graph is also its topological
minor.
⇤
Fig. 1.7.4. A subdivision of K4 viewed as an IK4
Now that we have met all the standard relations between graphs,
we can also deﬁne what it means to embed one graph in another. Basi-
cally, an embedding of G in H is an injective map ': V (G) ! V (H) that
embedding
preserves the kind of structure we are interested in. Thus, ' embeds G
in H ‘as a subgraph’ if it preserves the adjacency of vertices, and ‘as an
induced subgraph’ if it preserves both adjacency and non-adjacency. If
' is deﬁned on E(G) as well as on V (G) and maps the edges xy of G to
independent paths in H between '(x) and '(y), it embeds G in H ‘as
a topological minor’. Similarly, an embedding ' of G in H ‘as a minor’
would be a map from V (G) to disjoint connected vertex sets in H (rather
than to single vertices) so that H has an edge between the sets '(x) and
'(y) whenever xy is an edge of G. Further variants are possible; depend-
ing on the context, one may wish to deﬁne embeddings ‘as a spanning
subgraph’, ‘as an induced minor’ and so on, in the obvious way.
1.8 Euler tours
Any mathematician who happens to ﬁnd himself in the East Prussian
city of K¨onigsberg (and in the 18th century) will lose no time to fol-
low the great Leonhard Euler’s example and inquire about a round trip
through the old city that traverses each of the bridges shown in Figure
1.8.1 exactly once.
Thus inspired,9 let us call a closed walk in a graph an Euler tour if
it traverses every edge of the graph exactly once. A graph is Eulerian if
Eulerian
it admits an Euler tour.
9 Anyone to whom such inspiration seems far-fetched, even after contemplating
Figure 1.8.2, may seek consolation in the multigraph of Figure 1.10.1.
1.8 Euler tours
