[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 1. The Basics
현재 소단원: 1.10 Other notions of graphs
직전 소단원: 「1.9 Some linear algebra」
[본문]
27
As usual, let B> denote the transpose of B.
Then B and B> deﬁne
linear maps B: E(G) ! V(G) and B>: V(G) ! E(G) with respect to the
standard bases. As is easy to check, B maps an edge set F ✓E to the
set of vertices incident with an odd number of edges in F, while B>maps
a set U ✓V to set of edges with exactly one end in U. In particular:
Proposition 1.9.6.
(i) The kernel of B is C(G).
(ii) The image of B> is B(G).
⇤
More on this in the exercises and notes at the end of this chapter.
The adjacency matrix A = (aij)n⇥n of G is deﬁned by
adjacency
matrix
aij :=
n 1
if vivj 2 E
0
otherwise.
Viewed as a linear map V ! V, the adjacency matrix maps a given set
U ✓V to the set of vertices with an odd number of neighbours in U.
Let D denote the real diagonal matrix (dij)n⇥n with dii = d(vi)
and dij = 0 otherwise. Our last proposition establishes a connection
between A and B (now viewed as real matrices), which can be veriﬁed
simply from the deﬁnition of matrix multiplication:
Proposition 1.9.7. BB> = A + D.
⇤
It is also instructive to check that A + D, with entries taken mod 2, de-
ﬁnes the same map V ! V as the composition of the maps of B and B>
(Exercise 57).
1.10 Other notions of graphs
For completeness, we now mention a few other notions of graphs which
feature less frequently or not at all in this book.
A hypergraph is a pair (V, E) of disjoint sets, where the elements
hypergraph
of E are non-empty subsets (of any cardinality) of V . Thus, graphs are
special hypergraphs.
A directed graph (or digraph) is a pair (V, E) of disjoint sets (of
directed
graph
vertices and edges) together with two maps init: E ! V and ter: E ! V
assigning to every edge e an initial vertex init(e) and a terminal vertex
init(e)
ter(e). The edge e is said to be directed from init(e) to ter(e). Note that
ter(e)
a directed graph may have several edges between the same two vertices
x, y. Such edges are called multiple edges; if they have the same direction
(say from x to y), they are parallel. If init(e) = ter(e), the edge e is called
a loop.
loop
1.10 Other notions of graphs

28
1. The Basics
A directed graph D is an orientation of an (undirected) graph G if
orientation
V (D) = V (G) and E(D) = E(G), and if {init(e), ter(e)} = {x, y} for
every edge e = xy. Intuitively, such an oriented graph arises from an
oriented
graph
undirected graph simply by directing every edge from one of its ends to
the other. Put di↵erently, oriented graphs are directed graphs without
loops or multiple edges.
A multigraph is a pair (V, E) of disjoint sets (of vertices and edges)
multigraph
together with a map E ! V [ [V ]2 assigning to every edge either one
or two vertices, its ends.
Thus, multigraphs too can have loops and
multiple edges: we may think of a multigraph as a directed graph whose
edge directions have been ‘forgotten’. To express that x and y are the
ends of an edge e we still write e = xy, though this no longer determines
e uniquely.
A graph is thus essentially the same as a multigraph without loops
or multiple edges. Somewhat surprisingly, proving a graph theorem more
generally for multigraphs may, on occasion, simplify the proof. More-
over, there are areas in graph theory (such as plane duality; see Chapters
4.6 and 6.5) where multigraphs arise more naturally than graphs, and
where any restriction to the latter would seem artiﬁcial and be tech-
nically complicated. We shall therefore consider multigraphs in these
cases, but without much technical ado: terminology introduced earlier
for graphs will be used correspondingly.
A few di↵erences, however, should be pointed out. A multigraph
may have cycles of length 1 or 2: loops, and pairs of multiple edges
(or double edges). A loop at a vertex makes it its own neighbour, and
contributes 2 to its degree; in Figure 1.10.1, we thus have d(ve) = 6.
The ends of loops and parallel edges in a multigraph G are considered as
separating that edge from the rest of G. The vertex v of a loop e, there-
fore, is a cutvertex unless ({v}, {e}) is a component of G, and ({v}, {e})
is a ‘block’ in the sense of Chapter 3.1. Thus, a multigraph with a loop
is never 2-connected, and any 3-connected multigraph is in fact a graph.
G/e
G
e
ve
Fig. 1.10.1. Contracting the edge e in the multigraph correspond-
ing to Fig. 1.8.1
The notion of edge contraction is simpler in multigraphs than in
graphs. If we contract an edge e = xy in a multigraph G = (V, E) to a
new vertex ve, there is no longer a need to delete any edges other than

29
e itself: edges parallel to e become loops at ve, while edges xv and yv
become parallel edges between ve and v (Fig. 1.10.1). Thus, formally,
E(G/e) = E r{e}, and only the incidence map e0 7! {init(e0), ter(e0)} of
G has to be adjusted to the new vertex set in G/e. Contracting a loop
thus has the same e↵ect as deleting it.
The notion of a minor adapts accordingly. The contraction minor
G/P deﬁned by a partition P of V (G) into connected sets has precisely
those edges of G that join distinct partition classes. If there are several
such edges between the same two classes, they become parallel edges
of G/P. However, we do not normally give G/P any loops resulting from
edges of G whose ends lie in the same partition class U. This would re-
quire us to say which of the edges of G[U] are contracted (assuming they
induce a connected spanning subgraph of G[U]), or at least how many
are, which seems futile if we do not care about loops in G/P anyway.
Fig. 1.10.2. Suppressing the white vertices
If v is a vertex of degree 2 in a multigraph G, then by suppressing v
suppressing
a vertex
we mean deleting v and adding an edge between its two neighbours. (If
its two incident edges are identical, i.e. form a loop at v, we add no
edge and obtain just G −v. If they go to the same vertex w 6= v, the
added edge will be a loop at w. See Figure 1.10.2.) Since the degrees
of all vertices other than v remain unchanged when v is suppressed,
suppressing several vertices of G always yields a well-deﬁned multigraph
that is independent of the order in which those vertices are suppressed.
Finally, it should be pointed out that authors who usually work with
multigraphs tend to call them ‘graphs’; in their terminology, our graphs
would be called ‘simple graphs’.
Exercises
1.−What is the number of edges in a Kn?
2.
Let d 2 N and V := {0, 1}d; thus, V is the set of all 0–1 sequences of
length d. The graph on V in which two such sequences form an edge if
and only if they di↵er in exactly one position is called the d-dimensional
cube. Determine the average degree, number of edges, diameter, girth
and circumference of this graph.
(Hint for the circumference: induction on d.)
Exercises
