[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 1. The Basics
현재 소단원: 1.ex Exercises
직전 소단원: 「1.10 Other notions of graphs」
[연습문제]
29
e itself: edges parallel to e become loops at ve, while edges xv and yv
become parallel edges between ve and v (Fig. 1.10.1). Thus, formally,
E(G/e) = E r{e}, and only the incidence map e0 7! {init(e0), ter(e0)} of
G has to be adjusted to the new vertex set in G/e. Contracting a loop
thus has the same e↵ect as deleting it.
The notion of a minor adapts accordingly. The contraction minor
G/P deﬁned by a partition P of V (G) into connected sets has precisely
those edges of G that join distinct partition classes. If there are several
such edges between the same two classes, they become parallel edges
of G/P. However, we do not normally give G/P any loops resulting from
edges of G whose ends lie in the same partition class U. This would re-
quire us to say which of the edges of G[U] are contracted (assuming they
induce a connected spanning subgraph of G[U]), or at least how many
are, which seems futile if we do not care about loops in G/P anyway.
Fig. 1.10.2. Suppressing the white vertices
If v is a vertex of degree 2 in a multigraph G, then by suppressing v
suppressing
a vertex
we mean deleting v and adding an edge between its two neighbours. (If
its two incident edges are identical, i.e. form a loop at v, we add no
edge and obtain just G −v. If they go to the same vertex w 6= v, the
added edge will be a loop at w. See Figure 1.10.2.) Since the degrees
of all vertices other than v remain unchanged when v is suppressed,
suppressing several vertices of G always yields a well-deﬁned multigraph
that is independent of the order in which those vertices are suppressed.
Finally, it should be pointed out that authors who usually work with
multigraphs tend to call them ‘graphs’; in their terminology, our graphs
would be called ‘simple graphs’.
Exercises
1.−What is the number of edges in a Kn?
2.
Let d 2 N and V := {0, 1}d; thus, V is the set of all 0–1 sequences of
length d. The graph on V in which two such sequences form an edge if
and only if they di↵er in exactly one position is called the d-dimensional
cube. Determine the average degree, number of edges, diameter, girth
and circumference of this graph.
(Hint for the circumference: induction on d.)
Exercises

30
1. The Basics
3.
Let G be a graph containing a cycle C, and assume that G contains
a path of length at least k between two vertices of C. Show that G
contains a cycle of length at least
p
k.
4.−Is the bound in Proposition 1.3.2 best possible?
5.
Let v0 be a vertex in a graph G, and D0 := {v0}. For n = 1, 2, . . .
inductively deﬁne Dn := NG(D0 [ . . . [ Dn−1). Show that Dn = { v |
d(v0, v) = n } and Dn+1 ✓N(Dn) ✓Dn−1 [ Dn+1 for all n 2 N.
6.
Show that rad(G) 6 diam(G) 6 2 rad(G) for every graph G.
7.
Prove the weakening of Theorem 1.3.4 obtained by replacing average
with minimum degree. Deduce that |G| > n0(d/2, g) for every graph G
as given in the theorem.
8.
Show that graphs of girth at least 5 and order n have a minimum degree
of o(n). In other words, show that there is a function f: N ! N such
that f(n)/n ! 0 as n ! 1 and δ(G) 6 f(n) for all such graphs G.
9.+ Show that every connected graph G of order at least 3 contains a path
or cycle of length at least min {2δ(G), |G|}.
10.
Show that a connected graph of diameter k and minimum degree d has
at least about kd/3 vertices but need not have substantially more.
11.−Show that the components of a graph partition its vertex set. (In other
words, show that every vertex belongs to exactly one component.)
12.−Show that every 2-connected graph contains a cycle.
13.
Determine (G) and λ(G) for G = P m, Km, Km,n, Cn and the d-
dimensional cube (Exercise 2), for all m > 1 and d, n > 3.
14.−Is there a function f: N ! N such that, for all k 2 N, every graph of
minimum degree at least f(k) is k-connected?
15.
Let ↵, β be two graph invariants with positive integer values. Formalize
the two statements below, and show that each implies the other:
(i) β is bounded above by a function of ↵;
(ii) ↵can be forced up by making β large enough.
Show that the statement
(iii) ↵is bounded below by a function of β
is not equivalent to (i) and (ii). Which small change will make it so?
16.
Show that every graph that is k-edge-connected but loses this property
whenever we delete an edge has a vertex of degree k.
17.+ Show for every k 2 N that every graph of minimum degree 2k has a
(k + 1)-edge-connected subgraph. Is it enough to assume an average
degree of at least 2k?

Exercises
31
18.
Consider the proof of Theorem 1.4.3. Would it not seem more natural
to assume in the second statement of (⇤) that "(G0) > γ −k, as required
for H in the statement of the theorem?
(i) Look how this alteration would change the proof: which parts
would carry over, which could be adapted, and which would fail?
(ii) Explain how the use of an assumption of the form m > ckn −bk
rather than m > ckn helps to obtain a contradiction in the ﬁnal
inequality of the proof.
19.
Prove Theorem 1.5.1.
20.
Revisit the proof that every connected graph has a spanning tree given
as an application of Theorem 1.5.1 (iii). What is wrong with the analog-
ous ‘proof’ that says, ‘take a maximal acyclic subgraph and apply (iv)’?
(Hint: Something must be wrong, as the ‘proof’ does not use the as-
sumption that the graph is connected. But where exactly is the error?)
21.−(i) Show that every tree T has at least ∆(T) leaves.
(ii) Deduce that in a connected graph G we can delete ∆(G) vertices
so that the rest remains connected.
22.
Let T be a tree with ` > 2 leaves and maximum degree at most 3.
(i)−Show that T has exactly ` −2 vertices of degree 3.
(ii) Show that T contains b`/2c disjoint paths between distinct
leaves.
23.
Find two very short proofs, one by induction and another without, that
every tree has more leaves than vertices of degree at least 3.
24.
Let F, F 0 be forests on the same set of vertices, with kFk < kF 0k.
Show that F 0 has an edge e /
2 F such that F + e is again a forest.
25.
Show that the tree-order associated with a rooted tree T is indeed a
partial order on V (T), and verify the claims made about this partial
order in the text.
26.
Show that a graph is 2-edge-connected if and only if it has a strongly
connected orientation, one in which every vertex can be reached from
every other vertex by a directed path.
27.
Modify the proof of Proposition 1.5.5 to show that we may specify any
vertex of G as the root of the normal spanning tree sought.
28.
(i) Find a short proof for the existence of normal spanning trees in
connected graphs that applies induction by deleting a vertex.
(ii) Adapt your proof to show that every path in a connected graph
extends to a normal spanning tree.

32
1. The Basics
29.+ Let G be a connected graph, and let r
2 G be a vertex.
Starting
from r, move along the edges of G, going whenever possible to a vertex
not visited so far. If there is no such vertex, go back along the edge by
which the current vertex was ﬁrst reached (unless the current vertex
is r; then stop). Show that the edges traversed form a normal spanning
tree in G with root r.
(This procedure has earned those trees the name of depth-ﬁrst search
trees.)
30.
Let T be a set of subtrees of a tree T, and k 2 N.
(i) Show that if the trees in T have pairwise non-empty intersection
then their overall intersection T
T is non-empty.
(ii) Show that either T contains k disjoint trees or there is a set of
at most k −1 vertices of T meeting every tree in T .
31.
Show that every automorphism of a tree ﬁxes a vertex or an edge.
32.−Do the partition classes of a regular bipartite graph always have the
same size?
33.−Show that a graph is bipartite if and only if every induced cycle has
even length.
34.
Is the vertex partition of a bipartite graph uniquely determined?
35.
Prove or disprove that a graph is bipartite if and only if no two adjacent
vertices have the same distance from any other vertex.
36.
Proposition 1.6.1 characterizes the graphs that contain no odd cycle.
Can you characterize those that contain no even cycle?
37.
Find a function f: N ! N such that, for all k 2 N, every graph of aver-
age degree at least f(k) has a bipartite subgraph of minimum degree
at least k.
38.
Show that the minor relation 4 deﬁnes a partial ordering on any set
of pairwise non-isomorphic ﬁnite graphs. Is the same true for inﬁnite
graphs?
39.
If we had been careless, we might have deﬁned a walk as an alternating
sequence of vertices and edges, v0e0v1e1 . . . ek−1vk say, such that every
edge ei is incident with both vi and vi+1. Show that Theorem 1.8.1
would fail with this deﬁnition, and ﬁnd where the di↵erence between
the two deﬁnitions matters in the proof.
40.
Prove or disprove that every connected graph contains a walk that
traverses each of its edges exactly once in each direction.
41.
Show that a cut in a connected graph G is a bond if and only if both
parts of the corresponding bipartition of V (G) are connected in G. Is
every atomic cut a bond?
42.
Let A be a set of vertices in a tree T.
Show that T contains a set
of edge-disjoint paths with ends in A such that every vertex from A
except at most one is the end of exactly one such path.

Exercises
33
43.
To how few edges can you reduce the complete graph Kn by deleting
one edge at a time from a 4-cycle found in the current graph?
44.
Show that the cycle space of a graph is spanned by
(i) its induced cycles;
(ii) its geodesic cycles.
(A cycle C ✓G is geodesic in G if, for every two vertices of C, their
distances in G equals their distance in C.)
45.
Show that the set of sides of a cut in a connected graph is well deﬁned.
46.−Show directly, without appealing to atomic cuts, that the cuts of a
graph together with the empty set form a subspace of its edge space.
How does the vertex partition of a sum of two given cuts arise from
their vertex partitions?
47.
Let F be a cut in G, with vertex partition {V1, V2}. For i = 1, 2 let
Ci
1, . . . , Ci
k(i) denote the components of G[Vi].
Use the Ci
j to deﬁne
bonds whose disjoint union is F.
48.
Show that the cut space of any graph has a basis of atomic cuts.
49.
Prove that the cycles and the cuts in a graph together generate its
entire edge space, or ﬁnd a counterexample.
50.−Show the following duality between the fundamental cycles Ce and the
fundamental cuts Df in a graph with respect to some ﬁxed spanning
tree: e 2 Df , f 2 Ce.
51.
Show that in a connected graph the minimal edge sets containing an
edge from every spanning tree are precisely its bonds.
52.
Given a spanning tree T = (V, F) of a connected graph G = (V, E), its
fundamental cuts Df and fundamental cycles Ce witness the following:
(i) B has a basis ( Df | f 2 F ) such that Df \F = {f} for all f 2 F;
(ii) C has a basis ( Ce | e 2 E r F ) such that Ce \ (E r F) = {e}
for all e 2 E r F.
Show that, conversely, every set F ✓E satisfying (i) and (ii) is the edge
set of a spanning tree of G. Is the same true as soon as F satisﬁes one of
these two statements? Then show that this spanning tree has precisely
the Df as fundamental cuts, and the Ce as fundamental cycles.
53.
Let F be a set of edges in a graph G.
(i) Show that F extends to an element of B(G) if and only if it
contains no odd cycle.
(ii)+ Show that F extends to an element of C(G) if and only if it
contains no odd cut.
54.+ In a graph G let a, b be two vertices that are separated by a cut F of
k edges but cannot be separated by fewer edges. Show that F is not a
sum of cuts of fewer than k edges.

34
1. The Basics
55.+ Prove that the edge set of any graph G can be written as a disjoint
union E(G) = C [ D with C 2 C(G) and D 2 B(G).
56.
Show that a set of vertices lies in the image of the incidence matrix of
a connected graph if and only if it has even cardinality.
57.
(i) Generalize Proposition 1.9.6 by describing the images under B
and B> of given sets F ✓E and U ✓V , as indicated in the text.
(ii) Reprove Proposition 1.9.7 for matrices with values in F2 by showing
that BB> and A + D deﬁne the same the maps V ! V.
58.
Let A = (aij)n⇥n be the adjacency matrix of the graph G. Show that
the matrix Ak = (a0
ij)n⇥n displays, for all i, j 6 n, the number a0
ij of
walks of length k from vi to vj in G.
Notes
The terminology used in this book is mostly standard. Alternatives do exist,
and some of these are stated when a concept is ﬁrst deﬁned.
Our formal deﬁnition of a graph G = (V, E) with E ✓[V ]2 is intended to
convey two messages: that the edges are undirected (since {u, v} = {v, u} for
sets), and that there are neither loops (since {v, v} /
2 [V ]2 because |{v, v}| = 1)
nor multiple edges (since two sets are equal as soon as they have the same
elements). This formal deﬁnition – like any other – occasionally clashes with
other standard terminology.13
But avoiding all such possible clashes would
make the terminology so unwieldy that it would defeat the purpose of clarity.
There is one small point where our notation deviates slightly from stan-
dard usage. Complete graphs, paths, cycles etc. of given order are usually
denoted by Kn, Pk, C` and so on, but we use superscripts instead of sub-
scripts. This has the advantage of leaving the variables K, P, C etc. free for
ad-hoc use: we may now enumerate components as C1, C2, . . ., speak of paths
P1, . . . , Pk, and so on – without any danger of confusion.
Theorem14 1.3.4 was proved by N. Alon, S. Hoory and N. Linial, The
Moore bound for irregular graphs, Graphs Comb. 18 (2002), 53–57.
The
proof uses an ingenious argument counting random walks along the edges of
the graph considered.
The main assertion of Theorem 1.4.3, that an average degree of at least 4k
forces a k-connected subgraph, is from W. Mader, Existenz n-fach zusammen-
h¨angender Teilgraphen in Graphen gen¨ugend großer Kantendichte, Abh. Math.
Sem. Univ. Hamburg 37 (1972) 86–97.
For the history of the K¨onigsberg bridge problem, and Euler’s actual
part in its solution, see N.L. Biggs, E.K. Lloyd & R.J. Wilson, Graph Theory
1736–1936, Oxford University Press 1976.
13 For example, when e = {u, v} is an edge of G, then G −e and G −{u, v} mean
two di↵erent things: in G −e we deleted the edge e but kept the vertices u and v,
whereas in G −{u, v} we deleted the vertices u, v and all their incident edges.
14 In the interest of readability, the end-of-chapter notes in this book give refer-
ences only for Theorems, and only in cases where these references cannot be found
in a monograph or survey cited for that chapter.
