[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 2. Matching, Covering and Packing
현재 소단원: 2.5 Path covers
직전 소단원: 「2.4 Tree packing and arboricity」
[본문]
54
2. Matching, Covering and Packing
For the theorem’s packing assertion, let U
2 P be given. For all
j = 1, . . . , k let Sj be the subgraph of Tj induced on U by its edges in D.
These forests Sj are edge-disjoint, since by the maximality of E(T ) and
Lemma 2.4.5 no edge in D lies in more than one Tj. Let us show that
the Sj are connected.
Since the edges from D form a connected submultigraph on U, it
suﬃces to show that for every edge uu0 2 D with u, u0 2 U there is a
u–u0 path in Sj. This is clear if uu0 lies in Tj, and hence in Sj. If it
does not, then the path uTju0 still has all its edges e in D, and hence lies
in Sj: if e0, . . . , en is an exchange chain witnessing that e0 = uu0 2 D,
then e, e0, . . . en is an exchange chain putting e in D, because e lies on
the fundamental cycle of e0 with respect to Tj.
As every Tj induces connected subgraphs Sj on the partition classes
of P, contracting these Sj turns the Tj into spanning trees T 0
j of G/P.
These T 0
j cover all the edges of G/P, since E r E(T ) ✓D.
⇤
The packing-covering theorem di↵ers from both the tree packing
and the tree covering theorem in a fundamental way. The non-trivial
directions of the latter two theorems each obtain a structural assertion
about a graph, the existence of a packing or covering, as a consequence
of quantitative assumptions about all their minors of a certain type:
contraction minors for the packing theorem, and ‘deletion minors’ – i.e.,
subgraphs – for the covering theorem. This format makes them interest-
ing: they o↵er valuable structural information for one graph in exchange
for less valuable quantitative information about many smaller graphs.
The packing-covering theorem, by contrast, makes a structural as-
sertion about every graph: with no need for any assumptions at all,
neither quantitative nor qualitative.
The packing-covering theorem extends to inﬁnite graphs in two in-
terestingly di↵erent ways; see Exercises 20 and 131 in Chapter 8.
2.5 Path covers
Let us return once more to K¨onig’s duality theorem for bipartite graphs,
Theorem 2.1.1. If we orient every edge of G from A to B, the theorem
tells us how many disjoint directed paths we need in order to cover all
the vertices of G: every directed path has length 0 or 1, and clearly the
number of paths in such a ‘path cover’ is smallest when it contains as
many paths of length 1 as possible – in other words, when it contains a
maximum-cardinality matching.
In this section we put the above question more generally: how many
paths in a given directed graph will suﬃce to cover its entire vertex set?
Of course, this could be asked just as well for undirected graphs. As it
turns out, however, the result we shall prove is rather more trivial in

2.5 Path covers
55
the undirected case (exercise), and the directed case will also have an
interesting corollary.
A directed path is a directed graph P 6= ; with distinct vertices
x0, . . . , xk and edges e0, . . . , ek−1 such that ei is an edge directed from
xi to xi+1, for all i < k. In this section, path will always mean ‘directed
path
path’. The vertex xk above is the last vertex of the path P, and when P
is a set of paths we write ter(P) for the set of their last vertices. A path
ter(P)
cover of a directed graph G is a set of disjoint paths in G which together
path cover
contain all the vertices of G.
Theorem 2.5.1. (Gallai & Milgram 1960)
Every directed graph G has a path cover P and an independent set
{ vP | P 2 P } of vertices such that vP 2 P for every P 2 P.
Proof. Clearly, G has a path cover, e.g. by trivial paths. We prove by
induction on |G| that for every path cover P = {P1, . . . , Pm} with ter(P)
P, Pi
minimal there is a set { vP | P 2 P } as claimed. For each i, let vi denote
vi
the last vertex of Pi.
If ter(P) = {v1, . . . , vm} is independent there is nothing more to
show, so we assume that G has an edge from v2 to v1. Since P2v2v1
is again a path, the minimality of ter(P) implies that v1 is not the
only vertex of P1; let v be the vertex preceding v1 on P1.
Then
v
P0 := {P1v, P2, . . . , Pm} is a path cover of G0 := G −v1 (Fig. 2.5.1).
P0, G0
Clearly, any independent set of representatives for P0 in G0 will also work
for P in G, so all we have to check is that we may apply the induction
hypothesis to P0. It thus remains to show that ter(P0) = {v, v2, . . . , vm}
is minimal among the sets of last vertices of path covers of G0.
. . .
v1
v2
P1
P2
v
Pm
Fig. 2.5.1. Path covers of G and G0
Suppose then that G0 has a path cover P00 with ter(P00) ( ter(P0).
If a path P 2 P00 ends in v, we may replace P in P00 by Pvv1 to obtain
a path cover of G whose set of last vertices is a proper subset of ter(P),
contradicting the choice of P. If a path P 2 P00 ends in v2 (but none in v),
we similarly replace P in P00 by Pv2v1 to obtain a contradiction to the

56
2. Matching, Covering and Packing
minimality of ter(P). Hence ter(P00) ✓{v3, . . . , vm}. But now P00 and
the trivial path {v1} together form a path cover of G that contradicts
the minimality of ter(P).
⇤
As a corollary to Theorem 2.5.1 we obtain a classical result from
the theory of partial orders. Recall that a subset of a partially ordered
set (P, 6) is a chain in P if its elements are pairwise comparable; it is
chain
an antichain if they are pairwise incomparable.
antichain
Corollary 2.5.2. (Dilworth 1950)
In every ﬁnite partially ordered set (P, 6), the minimum number of
chains with union P is equal to the maximum cardinality of an antichain
in P.
Proof. If A is an antichain in P of maximum cardinality, then clearly
P cannot be covered by fewer than |A| chains. The fact that |A| chains
will suﬃce follows from Theorem 2.5.1 applied to the directed graph on
P with the edge set { (x, y) | x < y }.
⇤
Exercises
1.
Let M be a matching in a bipartite graph G. Show that if M is sub-
optimal, i.e. contains fewer edges than some other matching in G, then
G contains an augmenting path with respect to M.
Does this fact
generalize to matchings in non-bipartite graphs?
2.
(continued)
Describe an algorithm that ﬁnds, as eﬃciently as possible, a matching
of maximum cardinality in any bipartite graph.
3.
Show that if there exist injective functions A ! B and B ! A between
two inﬁnite sets A and B then there exists a bijection A ! B.
4.
Moving alternately, two players jointly construct a path in some ﬁxed
graph G. If v1 . . . vn is the path constructed so far, the player to move
next has to ﬁnd a vertex vn+1 such that v1 . . . vn+1 is again a path.
Whichever player cannot move loses. For which graphs G does the ﬁrst
player have a winning strategy, for which the second?
5.−Derive the marriage theorem from K¨onig’s theorem.
6.
Let G and H be deﬁned as for the third proof of Hall’s theorem. Show
that dH(b) 6 1 for every b 2 B, and deduce the marriage theorem.
7.
Does our ﬁrst proof of the marriage theorem use the assumption that
the graph is ﬁnite? If so, can it be adapted so that it works for inﬁnite
graphs too?
