[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 2. Matching, Covering and Packing
현재 소단원: 2.ex Exercises
직전 소단원: 「2.5 Path covers」
[연습문제]
56
2. Matching, Covering and Packing
minimality of ter(P). Hence ter(P00) ✓{v3, . . . , vm}. But now P00 and
the trivial path {v1} together form a path cover of G that contradicts
the minimality of ter(P).
⇤
As a corollary to Theorem 2.5.1 we obtain a classical result from
the theory of partial orders. Recall that a subset of a partially ordered
set (P, 6) is a chain in P if its elements are pairwise comparable; it is
chain
an antichain if they are pairwise incomparable.
antichain
Corollary 2.5.2. (Dilworth 1950)
In every ﬁnite partially ordered set (P, 6), the minimum number of
chains with union P is equal to the maximum cardinality of an antichain
in P.
Proof. If A is an antichain in P of maximum cardinality, then clearly
P cannot be covered by fewer than |A| chains. The fact that |A| chains
will suﬃce follows from Theorem 2.5.1 applied to the directed graph on
P with the edge set { (x, y) | x < y }.
⇤
Exercises
1.
Let M be a matching in a bipartite graph G. Show that if M is sub-
optimal, i.e. contains fewer edges than some other matching in G, then
G contains an augmenting path with respect to M.
Does this fact
generalize to matchings in non-bipartite graphs?
2.
(continued)
Describe an algorithm that ﬁnds, as eﬃciently as possible, a matching
of maximum cardinality in any bipartite graph.
3.
Show that if there exist injective functions A ! B and B ! A between
two inﬁnite sets A and B then there exists a bijection A ! B.
4.
Moving alternately, two players jointly construct a path in some ﬁxed
graph G. If v1 . . . vn is the path constructed so far, the player to move
next has to ﬁnd a vertex vn+1 such that v1 . . . vn+1 is again a path.
Whichever player cannot move loses. For which graphs G does the ﬁrst
player have a winning strategy, for which the second?
5.−Derive the marriage theorem from K¨onig’s theorem.
6.
Let G and H be deﬁned as for the third proof of Hall’s theorem. Show
that dH(b) 6 1 for every b 2 B, and deduce the marriage theorem.
7.
Does our ﬁrst proof of the marriage theorem use the assumption that
the graph is ﬁnite? If so, can it be adapted so that it works for inﬁnite
graphs too?

Exercises
57
8.
Let k be an integer. Show that any two partitions of a ﬁnite set into
k-sets admit a common choice of representatives.
9.
Let A be a ﬁnite set with subsets A1, . . . , An, and let d1, . . . , dn 2 N.
Show that there are disjoint subsets Dk ✓Ak, with |Dk| = dk for all
k 6 n, if and only if
...
[
i2I
Ai
... >
X
i2I
di
for all I ✓{1, . . . , n}.
10.+ Prove that in an n-set X there are never more than $
n
bn/2c
%
subsets
such that none of these contains another.
(Hint. Construct $
n
bn/2c
%
chains covering the power set lattice of X.)
11.
Let G be a bipartite graph with bipartition {A, B}.
Assume that
δ(G) > 1, and that d(a) > d(b) for every edge ab with a 2 A. Show
that G contains a matching of A.
12.
Find a bipartite graph with a set of preferences such that no matching
of maximum size is stable and no stable matching has maximum size.
Find a non-bipartite graph with a set of preferences that has no stable
matching.
13.−Consider the algorithm described in the proof of the stable marriage
theorem.
Observe that once a vertex of B is matched, she remains
matched and gets happier with every change of her matching edge.
On the other hand, show that the sequence of matching edges incident
with a given vertex of A makes this vertex unhappier with every change
(disregarding the interim periods when he is unmatched).
14.
Show that all stable matchings of a given graph cover the same vertices.
(In particular, they have the same size.)
15.+ Show that the algorithm in our proof of Theorem 2.1.4 produces a
matching M such that no other stable matching makes any vertex in A
happier or any vertex in B unhappier than he or she is in M. Consider
only matched vertices for happiness.
16.+ Show that the following ‘obvious’ algorithm need not produce a stable
matching in a bipartite graph. Start with any matching. If the current
matching is not maximal, add an edge. If it is maximal but not stable,
insert an edge that creates instability, deleting any current matching
edges at its ends.
17.
Show that the union of two partial orderings 61, 62 of a ﬁnite set P
has a ‘dominating antichain’, a set A ✓P such that no two elements
of A are related in either 61 or 62 and for every x 2 P there exists an
a 2 A such that x 61 a or x 62 a. Deduce Theorem 2.1.4.
18.
Find a set S for Theorem 2.2.3 when G is a forest.

58
2. Matching, Covering and Packing
19.
A graph G is called (vertex-) transitive if, for any two vertices v, w 2 G,
there is an automorphism of G mapping v to w. Using the observa-
tions following the proof of Theorem 2.2.3, show that every transitive
connected graph of even order contains a 1-factor.
20.+ Show that a graph G contains k independent edges if and only if
q(G −S) 6 |S| + |G| −2k for all sets S ✓V (G).
21.−Find a cubic graph without a 1-factor.
22.+ Derive the marriage theorem from Tutte’s theorem.
23.−Disprove the analogue of K¨onig’s theorem (2.1.1) for non-bipartite
graphs, but show that H = {K2} has the Erd˝os-P´osa property.
24.
Let T be a tree and T a set of subtrees of T. Show that the maximum
number of disjoint trees in T equals the least cardinality of a set X of
vertices such that T −X contains no tree from T .
25.
For cubic graphs, Lemma 2.3.1 is considerably stronger than the Erd˝os-
P´osa theorem. Extend the lemma to arbitrary multigraphs of minimum
degree > 3, by ﬁnding a function g: N!N such that every multigraph of
minimum degree > 3 and order at least g(k) contains k disjoint cycles,
for all k 2 N. Alternatively, show that no such function g exists.
26.
Given a graph G, let ↵(G) denote the largest size of a set of independent
vertices in G. Prove that the vertices of G can be covered by at most
↵(G) disjoint subgraphs each isomorphic to a cycle or a K2 or K1.
27.
Show that if G has two edge-disjoint spanning trees, it has a connected
spanning subgraph all whose degrees are even.
28.
In the proofs of Theorems 2.4.1, 2.4.3 and 2.4.4, there is exactly one
place where we use that we are working with multigraphs. Where is it?
29.
Find the error in the following short ‘proof’ of Theorem 2.4.1. Call a
partition non-trivial if it has at least two classes and at least one of the
classes has more than one element. We show by induction on |V | + |E|
that G = (V, E) has k edge-disjoint spanning trees if every non-trivial
partition of V into r sets (say) has at least k(r −1) cross-edges. The
induction starts trivially with G = K1 if we allow k copies of K1 as a
family of k edge-disjoint spanning trees of K1. We now consider the
induction step. If every non-trivial partition of V into r sets (say) has
more than k(r −1) cross-edges, we delete any edge of G and are done
by induction. So V has a non-trivial partition {V1, . . . , Vr} with exactly
k(r −1) cross-edges. Assume that |V1| > 2. If G0 := G[V1] has k disjoint
spanning trees, we may combine these with k disjoint spanning trees
that exist in G/V1 by induction.
We may thus assume that G0 has
no k disjoint spanning trees. Then by induction it has a non-trivial
vertex partition {V 0
1, . . . , V 0
s} with fewer than k(s −1) cross-edges.
Then {V 0
1, . . . , V 0
s, V2, . . . , Vr} is a non-trivial vertex partition of G into
r + s −1 sets with fewer than k(r −1) + k(s −1) = k((r + s −1) −1)
cross-edges, a contradiction.

59
30.
A graph G is called balanced if "(H) 6 "(G) for every subgraph H ✓G.
(i) Find a few natural classes of balanced graphs.
(ii) Show that the arboricity of a balanced graph is bounded above
by its average degree. Is it even bounded by "? Or by " + 1?
(iii) Characterize, in terms of the balanced graphs or otherwise, the
graphs G such that "(H) > "(G) for every induced subgraph
H ✓G.
31.
Rephrase K¨onig’s and Dilworth’s theorems as pure existence statements
without any inequalities.
32.−Prove the undirected version of the theorem of Gallai & Milgram (with-
out using the directed version).
33.
Derive the marriage theorem from the theorem of Gallai & Milgram.
34.−Show that a partially ordered set of at least rs + 1 elements contains
either a chain of size r + 1 or an antichain of size s + 1.
35.
Prove the following dual version of Dilworth’s theorem: in every ﬁnite
partially ordered set (P, 6), the minimum number of antichains with
union P is equal to the maximum cardinality of a chain in P.
36.
Derive K¨onig’s theorem from Dilworth’s theorem.
37.
Find a partially ordered set that has no inﬁnite antichain but is not a
union of ﬁnitely many chains.
Notes
There is a very readable and comprehensive monograph about matching in
ﬁnite graphs: L. Lov´asz & M.D. Plummer, Matching Theory, Annals of Dis-
crete Math. 29, North Holland 1986. Two other very comprehensive sources
are A. Schrijver, Combinatorial optimization, Springer 2003, and A. Frank,
Connections in combinatorial optimization, Oxford University Press 2011. All
the references for the results in this chapter can be found in these books.
All the main theorems in this chapter are of a particularly attractive
type, which they share with several other fundamental theorems in graph the-
ory. They each assert that in some obvious inequality we can attain equality,
or that some obvious potential obstruction to some desirable property must
necessarily occur in all graphs that fail to have this property.
Phrased in
yet another way, these theorems provide easily checked ‘certiﬁcates’ for the
absence of some desirable property, which comes with its own obvious certiﬁ-
cate when it does hold. The theorems of K¨onig, Hall, Tutte, Dilworth, and
Nash-Williams proved in this chapter can all be viewed in this way.
As we shall see in Chapter 3, K¨onig’s Theorem of 1931 is no more than
the bipartite case of a more general theorem that is also of this type, which is
generally attributed to Menger (1927). However, Menger missed the bipartite
case in his original proof. When Menger showed K¨onig his theorem and proof
during a visit to Budapest in 1930, they seem to have noticed this gap. K¨onig
Notes
