[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 3. Connectivity
현재 소단원: 3.1 2-Connected graphs and subgraphs
직전 소단원: 「2.ex Exercises」
[본문]
3
Connectivity
Our deﬁnition of k-connectedness, given in Chapter 1.4, is somewhat un-
intuitive. It does not tell us much about ‘connections’ in a k-connected
graph: all it says is that we need at least k vertices to disconnect it.
The following deﬁnition – which, incidentally, implies the one above –
might have been more descriptive: ‘a graph is k-connected if any two of
its vertices can be joined by k independent paths’.
It is one of the classic results of graph theory that these two deﬁni-
tions are in fact equivalent, are dual aspects of the same property. We
shall study this theorem of Menger (1927) in some depth in Section 3.3.
In Sections 3.1 and 3.2, we investigate the structure of the 2-con-
nected and the 3-connected graphs. For these small values of k it is still
possible to give a simple general description of how these graphs can be
constructed.
In Sections 3.4 and 3.5 we look at other concepts of connectedness,
more recent than the standard one but no less important: the number of
H-paths in G for a subgraph H of G, and the existence of disjoint paths
in G linking up speciﬁed pairs of vertices.
3.1 2-Connected graphs and subgraphs
The simplest 2-connected graphs are the cycles. All the others can be
constructed inductively from a cycle by adding paths:
Proposition 3.1.1. A graph is 2-connected if and only if it can be
[4.2.6]
constructed from a cycle by successively adding H-paths to graphs H
already constructed (Fig. 3.1.1).
Proof.
Clearly, every graph constructed as described is 2-connected.
Conversely, let a 2-connected graph G be given.
Then G contains a
63
R. Diestel, Graph Theory, Graduate Texts in Mathematics 173,  
© Reinhard Diestel, under licence (exclusive for the print edition) 2025
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-70107-2_3

64
3. Connectivity
Fig. 3.1.1. The construction of 2-connected graphs
cycle, and hence has a maximal subgraph H constructible as above.
H
Since any edge xy 2 E(G) r E(H) with x, y 2 H would deﬁne an H-
path, H is an induced subgraph of G. Thus if H 6= G, then by the
connectedness of G there is an edge vw with v 2 G −H and w 2 H. As
G is 2-connected, G−w contains a v–H path P. Then wvP is an H-path
in G, and H [wvP is a constructible subgraph of G larger than H. This
contradicts the maximality of H.
⇤
Just as an arbitrary graph can be decomposed into its maximal con-
nected subgraphs, or components, we can try to decompose a connected
graph G into its maximal 2-connected subgraphs. These may not quite
be disjoint, and they may not quite cover all of G. However, it is easy
to weaken the notion of ‘maximal 2-connected subgraph’ slightly so that
the subgraphs ﬁtting the weaker notion do cover G and are still nearly
disjoint. These ‘blocks’ ﬁt together nicely in a tree-like fashion, which
captures precisely the overall structure of G in terms of those blocks.
Formally, a block is a maximal connected subgraph without a cutver-
block
tex.1 Thus, every block is either a maximal 2-connected subgraph, or
a bridge (with its ends), or an isolated vertex. Conversely, every such
subgraph is a block. By their maximality, di↵erent blocks of G overlap
in at most one vertex, which is then a cutvertex of G. Hence every edge
of G lies in a unique block, and G is the union of its blocks.
Cycles and bonds are conﬁned to a single block:
Lemma 3.1.2. Let G be any graph.
[4.6]
(i) The cycles in G are precisely the cycles in its blocks.
(ii) The bonds of G are precisely the bonds of its blocks.
Proof. (i) Any cycle in G is a connected subgraph without a cutvertex,
and hence lies in some maximal such subgraph. By deﬁnition, this is a
block of G.
1 . . . of the subgraph; it may contain cutvertices of G.

3.1 2-Connected graphs and subgraphs
65
(ii) The proof follows easily by repeated application of the following
observation. Consider any cut in G. Let xy be one of its edges, and B
the block containing it. By the maximality of B in the deﬁnition of a
block, G contains no B-path. Hence every x–y path in G lies in B, so
those edges of our cut that lie in B separate x from y even in G.
⇤
As every edge lies in a unique block, belonging to a common block
is an equivalence relation on the edge set of a graph. This equivalence
can be expressed in two other interesting ways:
Lemma 3.1.3. The following statements are equivalent for distinct
[4.6]
edges e, f of a graph G:
(i) The edges e, f belong to a common block of G.
(ii) The edges e, f belong to a common cycle in G.
(iii) The edges e, f belong to a common bond of G.
Proof. (i)!(ii) It clearly suﬃces to prove that in a 2-connected graph
any two 2-sets of vertices can be joined by two disjoint paths.
This
follows easily by induction based on Proposition 3.1.1.2
(ii)!(iii) Deleting e and f from a cycle C 3 e, f leaves a partition of
V (C) into two connected sets. Extend this to a partitition into two con-
nected sets of the vertex set of the component of G containing C. (How?)
The edges between these sets form a bond of G containing e and f.
(iii)!(i) By Lemma 3.1.2 (ii), two edges can lie in a common bond
only if they belong to the same block.
⇤
Our last lemma on blocks shows how they ﬁt together to form the
coarse structure of G. Let A denote the set of cutvertices of G, and B
the set of its blocks. The bipartite graph on A [ B formed by the edges
aB with a 2 B is the block graph of G, see Figure 3.1.2.
block
graph
a0
a
a0
a
B0
B0
B
B
Fig. 3.1.2. A graph and its block graph
2 See Exercise 5. Note that this is the case k = 2 of Menger’s theorem (3.3.1).

66
3. Connectivity
Lemma 3.1.4. The block graph of a connected graph is a tree.
⇤
Lemma 3.1.4 generalizes to graphs of higher connectivity: every
(k −1)-connected graph has a canonical tree-like decomposition that
separates all its ‘k-blocks’. See Theorem 12.3.7 for the precise statement,
and Exercise 17 in Chapter 12 for the case of k = 3.
3.2 The structure of 3-connected graphs
In this section we describe how every 3-connected graph can be ob-
tained from a K4 by a succession of elementary operations preserving
3-connectedness. We then prove a theorem of Tutte about the algebraic
structure of the cycle space of 3-connected graphs; this will play an
important role again in Chapter 4.5.
Proposition 3.1.1 describes how the 2-connected graphs can be con-
structed inductively, starting from a cycle. All the graphs constructed
in the process were themselves 2-connected, so the graphs construct-
ible in this way are precisely the 2-connected graphs. We shall now do
something similar for 3-connected graphs.
We shall prove that every
3-connected graph G 6= K4 can be turned into a smaller 3-connected
graph in two ways: by deleting an edge (and suppressing any vertices of
degree 2 that may arise), and by contracting an edge. Inverting these
processes will give us two independent ways of building all 3-connected
graphs from a K4.
Given an edge e in a graph G, we write G .−e for the multigraph ob-
G .−e
tained from G−e by suppressing any end of e that has degree 2 in G−e.3
Lemma 3.2.1. Let e be an edge in a graph G. If G .−e is 3-connected,
then so is G.
Proof.
Thinking of G as obtained from G .−e by adding e, let us call
(1.4.2)
the vertices of G .−e the old vertices of G, and any other vertex of G
(which will be an end of e) a new vertex. Remembering that G .−e, being
3-connected, has no parallel edges, it is easy to see that, in G, no two
vertices x1, x2 can separate a new vertex from all the old vertices. So it
suﬃces to show that {x1, x2} cannot separate two old vertices. If they
did, then those old vertices would be separated in G .−e by x0
1 and x0
2,
where either x0
i = xi or, if xi is new, x0
i is the edge of G .−e subdivided
by xi. By Proposition 1.4.2, this contradicts our assumption that G .−e
is 3-connected.
⇤
3 See Chapter 1.10 for the formal deﬁnition of suppressing vertices in a multi-
graph. Recall also that 3-connected multigraphs cannot have multiple edges. Since
parallel edges arising when a vertex is suppressed are not deleted, our assumption in
Lemma 3.2.1 that the multigraph G .−e is 3-connected implies that no parallel edges
arise when it is formed from the graph G. Thus G .−e, too, is in fact a graph.
