[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 4. Planar Graphs
현재 소단원: 4.1 Topological prerequisites
직전 소단원: 「3.ex Exercises」
[본문]
4
Planar Graphs
When we draw a graph on a piece of paper, we naturally try to do this
as transparently as possible. One obvious way to limit the mess created
by all the lines is to avoid intersections. For example, we may ask if we
can draw the graph in such a way that no two edges meet in a point
other than a common end.
Graphs drawn in this way are called plane graphs; abstract graphs
that can be drawn in this way are called planar. Due to their natural
appeal, plane graphs have been studied right from the outset of graph
theory; the most prominent example is the four colour problem for maps,
which we shall meet in Chapter 5.
The seemingly unrelated question of how we can characterize planar
graphs combinatorially, and conversely of which role they play elsewhere
in graph theory, is not only equally interesting, but has been found to be
quite unexpectedly relevant. Indeed, we shall see in Chapter 12 that the
planar graphs – in fact, the graphs embeddable in any given surface –
play a central role in one of the deepest theorems of all of graph the-
ory: the structure theorem that describes all graphs without any ﬁxed
minor. (Note that there is nothing topological in the deﬁnition of that
class.) Thus, planar graphs are not just for colouring puzzles: they are
important, and they deserve rigorous study.
In this chapter we study both plane and planar graphs, as well as
the relationship between the two: the question of how an abstract planar
graph might be drawn in fundamentally di↵erent ways. After collecting
together in Section 4.1 the few basic topological facts that will enable
us later to prove all results rigorously without too much technical ado,
we begin in Section 4.2 by studying the structural properties of plane
graphs. In Section 4.3, we investigate how two drawings of the same
graph can di↵er. The main result of that section is that 3-connected
planar graphs have essentially only one drawing, in some very strong
and natural topological sense. The next two sections are devoted to the
93
R. Diestel, Graph Theory, Graduate Texts in Mathematics 173,  
© Reinhard Diestel, under licence (exclusive for the print edition) 2025
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-70107-2_4

94
4. Planar Graphs
proofs of all the classical planarity criteria, conditions telling us when
an abstract graph is planar. We complete the chapter with a section on
plane duality, a notion with fascinating links to algebraic, colouring, and
ﬂow properties of graphs (Chapters 1.9 and 6.5).
The traditional notion of a graph drawing is that its vertices are re-
presented by points in the Euclidean plane, its edges are represented by
curves between these points, and di↵erent curves meet only in common
endpoints. To avoid unnecessary topological complication, however, we
shall only consider curves that are piecewise linear; it is not diﬃcult to
show that any drawing can be straightened out in this way, so the two
notions come to the same thing.
4.1 Topological prerequisites
In this section we brieﬂy review some basic topological deﬁnitions and
facts needed later. All these facts have (by now) easy and well-known
proofs; see the notes for sources. Since those proofs contain no graph
theory, we do not repeat them here: indeed our aim is to collect precisely
those topological facts that we need but do not want to prove. Later,
all proofs will follow strictly from the deﬁnitions and facts stated here
(and be guided by but not rely on geometric intuition), so the material
presented now will help to keep elementary topological arguments in
those proofs to a minimum.
A straight line segment in the Euclidean plane is a subset of R2 that
has the form { p + λ(q −p) | 0 6 λ 6 1 } for distinct points p, q 2 R2. A
polygon is a subset of R2 which is the union of ﬁnitely many straight line
polygon
segments and is homeomorphic to the unit circle S1, the set of points in
R2 at distance 1 from the origin. Here, as later, any subset of a topolo-
gical space is assumed to carry the subspace topology. A polygonal arc is
a subset of R2 which is the union of ﬁnitely many straight line segments
and is homeomorphic to the closed unit interval [0, 1]. The images of 0
and of 1 under such a homeomorphism are the endpoints of this polygo-
nal arc, which links them and runs between them. Instead of ‘polygonal
arc’ we shall simply say arc in this chapter. If P is an arc between x
arc
and y, we denote the point set P r {x, y}, the interior of P, by ˚
P. As
˚
P, ˚e
continuous images of [0, 1], arcs, and ﬁnite unions of arcs, are compact,
and hence closed in R2. Their complements in R2, therefore, are open.
Let O ✓R2 be any open set. Being linked by an arc in O deﬁnes
an equivalence relation on O. The corresponding equivalence classes are
again open; they are the regions of O. A closed set X ✓R2 is said
region
to separate a region O0 of O if O0 r X has more than one region. The
separate
frontier of a set X ✓R2 is the set Y of all points y 2 R2 such that every
frontier
neighbourhood of y meets both X and R2 r X. Note that if X is open
then its frontier lies in R2 r X.

4.1 Topological prerequisites
95
The frontier of a region O of R2 r X, where X is a ﬁnite union of
points and arcs, has two important properties. The ﬁrst is accessibility:
if x 2 X lies on the frontier of O, then x can be linked to some point in O
by a straight line segment whose interior lies wholly inside O. As a conse-
quence, any two points on the frontier of O can be linked by an arc whose
interior lies in O (why?). The second notable property of the frontier of
O is that it separates O from the rest of R2. Indeed, if ': [0, 1]!P ✓R2
is continuous, with '(0) 2 O and '(1) /2 O, then P meets the frontier of
O at least in the point '(y) for y := inf { x | '(x) /2 O }, the ﬁrst point
of P in R2 r O.
Theorem 4.1.1. (Jordan Curve Theorem for Polygons)
For every polygon P ✓R2, the set R2 rP has exactly two regions. Each
[4.2.2]
[4.2.5]
[4.2.6]
[4.2.7]
[4.3.1]
[4.5.1]
[4.6.1]
[5.1.2]
of these has the entire polygon P as its frontier.
With the help of Theorem 4.1.1, it is not diﬃcult to prove the fol-
lowing lemma.
Lemma 4.1.2. Let P1, P2, P3 be three arcs, between the same two end-
[4.2.6]
[4.2.7]
[4.2.8]
[12.7.4]
points but otherwise disjoint.
(i) R2 r (P1 [ P2 [ P3) has exactly three regions, with frontiers
P1 [ P2, P2 [ P3 and P1 [ P3.
(ii) If P is an arc between a point in ˚
P1 and a point in ˚
P3 whose
interior lies in the region of R2 r (P1 [ P3) that contains ˚
P2, then
˚
P \ ˚
P2 6= ;.
P1
P2
P3
P
Fig. 4.1.1. The arcs in Lemma 4.1.2 (ii)
Our next lemma complements the Jordan curve theorem by saying
that an arc does not separate the plane. For easier application later, we
phrase this a little more generally:
Lemma 4.1.3. Let X1, X2 ✓R2 be disjoint sets, each the union of
[4.2.2]
[4.2.4]
ﬁnitely many points and arcs, and let P be an arc between a point in
X1 and one in X2 whose interior lies in a region O of R2 r (X1 [ X2).
Then O r P is a region of R2 r (X1 [ P [ X2).

96
4. Planar Graphs
X1
X2
P
O
Fig. 4.1.2. P does not separate the region O of R2 r (X1 [ X2)
It remains to introduce a few terms and facts that will be used only
once, when we consider notions of equivalence for graph drawings in
Chapter 4.3.
As usual, we denote by Sn the n-dimensional sphere, the set of
Sn
points in Rn+1 at distance 1 from the origin. The 2-sphere minus its
‘north pole’ (0, 0, 1) is homeomorphic to the plane; let us choose a ﬁxed
such homeomorphism ⇡: S2 r{(0, 0, 1)}!R2 (for example, stereograph-
⇡
ic projection). If P ✓R2 is a polygon and O is the bounded region of
R2 r P, let us call C := ⇡−1(P) a circle on S2, and the sets ⇡−1(O) and
S2 r ⇡−1(P [ O) the regions of S2 r C.
Our last tool is the theorem of Jordan and Schoenﬂies, again
adapted slightly for our purposes:
Theorem 4.1.4. Let ': C1 !C2 be a homeomorphism between two cir-
[4.3.1]
cles on S2, let O1 be a region of S2 rC1, and let O2 be a region of S2 rC2.
Then ' can be extended to a homeomorphism C1 [ O1 ! C2 [ O2.
4.2 Plane graphs
A plane graph is a pair (V, E) of ﬁnite sets with the following properties
plane
graph
(the elements of V are again called vertices, those of E edges):
(i) V ✓R2;
(ii) every edge is an arc between two vertices;
(iii) di↵erent edges have di↵erent sets of endpoints;
(iv) the interior of an edge contains no vertex and no point of any
other edge.
A plane graph (V, E) deﬁnes a graph G on V in a natural way. As long
as no confusion can arise, we shall use the name G of this abstract graph
also for the plane graph (V, E), or for the point set V [ S E; similar
notational conventions will be used for abstract versus plane edges, for
subgraphs, and so on.1
1 However, we shall continue to use r for di↵erences of point sets and −for graph
di↵erences – which may help a little to keep the two apart.
