[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 4. Planar Graphs
현재 소단원: 4.6 Plane duality
직전 소단원: 「4.5 Algebraic planarity criteria」
[본문]
114
4. Planar Graphs
4.6 Plane duality
In this section we shall use MacLane’s theorem to uncover another con-
nection between planarity and algebraic structure: a connection between
the duality of plane graphs, deﬁned below, and the duality of the cycle
and cut space hinted at in Chapters 1.9 and 2.4.
A plane multigraph is a pair G = (V, E) of ﬁnite sets (of vertices
plane
multigraph
and edges, respectively) satisfying the following conditions:
(i) V ✓R2;
(ii) every edge is either an arc between two vertices or a polygon
containing exactly one vertex (its endpoint);
(iii) apart from its own endpoint(s), an edge contains no vertex and
no point of any other edge.
We shall use terms deﬁned for plane graphs freely for plane multigraphs.
Note that, as in abstract multigraphs, both loops and double edges count
as cycles.
Let us consider the plane multigraph G shown in Figure 4.6.1. Let
us place a new vertex inside each face of G and link these new vertices
up to form another plane multigraph G⇤, as follows: for every edge e of
G we link the two new vertices in the faces incident with e by an edge e⇤
crossing e; if e is incident with only one face, we attach a loop e⇤to the
new vertex in that face, again crossing the edge e. The plane multigraph
G⇤formed in this way is then dual to G in the following sense: if we
apply the same procedure as above to G⇤, we obtain a plane multigraph
very similar to G; in fact, G itself may be reobtained from G⇤in this way.
G⇤
e⇤
e
G
Fig. 4.6.1. A plane graph and its dual
To make this idea more precise, let G = (V, E) and (V ⇤, E⇤) be any
two plane multigraphs, and put F(G) =: F and F((V ⇤, E⇤)) =: F ⇤. We
call (V ⇤, E⇤) a plane dual of G, and write (V ⇤, E⇤) =: G⇤, if there are
plane dual
G⇤
bijections
F ! V ⇤
f 7! v⇤(f)
E ! E⇤
e 7! e⇤
V ! F ⇤
v 7! f ⇤(v)
satisfying the following conditions:

4.6 Plane duality
115
(i) v⇤(f) 2 f for all f 2 F;
(ii) |e⇤\ G| = |˚e⇤\˚e| = |e \ G⇤| = 1 for all e 2 E, and in each of e
and e⇤this point is an inner point of a straight line segment;
(iii) v 2 f ⇤(v) for all v 2 V .
Every connected plane multigraph has a plane dual. Indeed, to sat-
isfy condition (i) we start by picking from each face f of G a point v⇤(f)
as a vertex for G⇤. We can then link these vertices up by independent
arcs as required by (ii), and using the connectedness of G show that
there is indeed a bijection V ! F ⇤satisfying (iii) (Exercise 37).
If G⇤
1 and G⇤
2 are two plane duals of G, then clearly G⇤
1 ⇠= G⇤
2; in fact,
one can show that the natural bijection v⇤
1(f) 7! v⇤
2(f) is a topological
isomorphism between G⇤
1 and G⇤
2. In this sense, we may speak of the
plane dual G⇤of G.
Finally, G is in turn a plane dual of G⇤. Indeed, this is witnessed
by the inverse maps of the bijections from the deﬁnition of G⇤: setting
v⇤(f ⇤(v)) := v and f ⇤(v⇤(f)) := f for f ⇤(v) 2 F ⇤and v⇤(f) 2 V ⇤, we
see that conditions (i) and (iii) for G⇤transform into (iii) and (i) for G,
while condition (ii) is symmetrical in G and G⇤. As duals are easily seen
to be connected (Exercise 36), this symmetry implies that connectedness
is also a necessary condition for G to have a dual.
Perhaps the most interesting aspect of plane duality is that it relates
geometrically two types of edge sets – cycles and bonds – that we have
previously seen to be algebraically related (Theorem 1.9.4):
Proposition 4.6.1. For any connected plane multigraph G, an edge set
[6.5.2]
E ✓E(G) is the edge set of a cycle in G if and only if E⇤:= { e⇤| e 2 E }
is a bond in G⇤.
Proof. By conditions (i) and (ii) in the deﬁnition of G⇤, two vertices
(4.1.1)
(4.2.4)
v⇤(f1) and v⇤(f2) of G⇤lie in the same component of G⇤−E⇤if and
only if f1 and f2 lie in the same region of R2 rS E: every v⇤(f1)–v⇤(f2)
path in G⇤−E⇤is an arc between f1 and f2 in R2 rS E, and conversely
every such arc P (with P \V (G) = ;) deﬁnes a walk in G⇤−E⇤between
v⇤(f1) and v⇤(f2).
Now if C ✓G is a cycle and E = E(C) then, by the Jordan curve
theorem and the above correspondence, G⇤−E⇤has exactly two com-
ponents. So E⇤is a bond of G⇤, a minimal non-empty cut.
Conversely, if E ✓E(G) is such that E⇤is a cut in G⇤then, by
Proposition 4.2.4 and the above correspondence, E contains the edges
of a cycle C ✓G. If E⇤is a bond, E cannot contain any further edges
(by the implication shown before). Hence E = E(C).
⇤

116
4. Planar Graphs
Proposition 4.6.1 suggests the following generalization of plane du-
ality to abstract multigraphs.5 Call a multigraph G⇤an abstract dual of
abstract
dual
a multigraph G if E(G⇤) = E(G) and the bonds in G⇤are precisely the
edge sets of cycles in G. (Neither G nor G⇤need be connected now.)
This correspondence between cycles and bonds extends to the spaces
they generate:
Proposition 4.6.2. If G⇤is an abstract dual of G, then the cut space
of G⇤is the cycle space of G, i.e.,
B(G⇤) = C(G) .
Proof. Since the cycles of G are precisely the bonds of G⇤, the subspace
(1.9.3)
C(G) they generate in E(G) = E(G⇤) is the same as the subspace gener-
ated by the bonds in G⇤. By Lemma 1.9.3, this is the space B(G⇤).
⇤
By Theorem 1.9.4, Proposition 4.6.2 implies at once that if G⇤is
(1.9.4)
an abstract dual of G then G is an abstract dual of G⇤. One can show
that if G is 3-connected, then G⇤is unique (up to isomorphism and the
addition of isolated vertices). By Lemma 3.1.3, a non-empty subset of
(3.1.3)
(3.1.2)
E(G) = E(G⇤) is the edge set of a block of G if and only if it is the edge
set of a block of G⇤. By Lemma 3.1.2, this implies that the blocks of G⇤
are duals of the blocks of G.
Although the notion of abstract duality arose as a generalization
of plane duality, it could have been otherwise. We knew already from
Theorem 1.9.4 that the cycles and the bonds of a graph form natural
and related sets of edges. It would not have been unthinkable to ask
whether, for some graphs, the orthogonality between these collections of
edge sets might give them suﬃciently similar intersection patterns that
a collection forming the cycles in one graph could form the bonds in
another, and vice versa. In other words, for which graphs can we move
their entire edge set to a new set of vertices, redeﬁning incidences, so
that precisely those sets of edges that used to form cycles now become
bonds (and vice versa)? Put in this way, it seems surprising that this
could ever be achieved, let alone for such a large and natural class of
graphs as all planar graphs.
As one of the highlights of classical planarity theory we now show
that the planar graphs are precisely those for which this can be done.
Admitting an abstract dual thus appears as a new planarity criterion.
Conversely, the theorem can be read as a surprising topological charac-
terization of the equally fundamental property of admitting an abstract
dual:
5 In what follows we shall use some lemmas from earlier chapters that were stated
for graphs only. These lemmas extend to multigraphs with proofs unchanged.

117
Theorem 4.6.3. (Whitney 1932)
A graph is planar if and only if it has an abstract dual.
Proof.
Let G be a planar graph, and consider any drawing.
Every
(1.9.2)
(4.5.1)
component C of this drawing has a plane dual C⇤. Consider these C⇤
as abstract multigraphs, and let G⇤be their disjoint union. Then the
bonds of G⇤are precisely those of the C⇤, which by Proposition 4.6.1
correspond to the cycles in G.
Conversely, suppose that G has an abstract dual G⇤. For a proof
that G is planar, it suﬃces by Theorem 4.5.1 and Proposition 4.6.2 to
show that B(G⇤) has a sparse basis. By Proposition 1.9.2, it does.
⇤
The duality theory for both abstract and plane graphs can be ex-
tended to inﬁnite graphs. As these can have inﬁnite bonds, their duals
must then have ‘inﬁnite cycles’. Such things do indeed exist, and are
fascinating: they arise as topological circles in a space formed by the
graph and its ends; see Chapter 8.6.
Exercises
1.
Show that every graph can be embedded in R3 with all edges straight.
2.−Show directly by Lemma 4.1.2 that K3,3 is not planar.
3.
Here is an inductive ‘proof’ that every maximal plane graph of order > 4
is a plane triangulation of minimum degree 3.
The induction starts
with K4. For the induction step, consider an arbitrary maximal plane
graph G of order n > 4, and consider all possible ways of extending it to
a maximal plane graph G0 of order n + 1 by adding a new vertex v. No
matter how this is done, v will come to sit in a face of G, which by the
inductive assumption is bounded by a triangle. Since G0 is maximally
planar, v must be joined to all three vertices of that triangle. Clearly,
G0 is another plane triangulation, and δ(G0) = d(v) = 3.
(i)−Find the ﬂaw in this ‘proof’.
(ii) Find a counterexample, and explain why the ‘proof’ overlooks it.
4.
Show that every planar graph is a union of three forests.
5.
The ancient Greeks loved regular plane graphs whose faces were bounded
by cycles of the same length.
(i) Show that such graphs exist for only ﬁnitely many pairs (d, `) of
degree d > 3 and cycle length `. Can you give an upper bound?
(ii)+Show that there are only ﬁnitely many such plane graphs, up
to topological isomorphism.
6.
A fullerene is a molecule that is made up entirely of carbon atoms
forming a cubic plane graph all whose faces are pentagons or hexagons.
Show that, since carbon atoms can form double bonds, every such graph
can be realized in principle by (4-valent) carbon atoms.
Exercises
