[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 4. Planar Graphs
현재 소단원: 4.ex Exercises
직전 소단원: 「4.6 Plane duality」
[연습문제]
117
Theorem 4.6.3. (Whitney 1932)
A graph is planar if and only if it has an abstract dual.
Proof.
Let G be a planar graph, and consider any drawing.
Every
(1.9.2)
(4.5.1)
component C of this drawing has a plane dual C⇤. Consider these C⇤
as abstract multigraphs, and let G⇤be their disjoint union. Then the
bonds of G⇤are precisely those of the C⇤, which by Proposition 4.6.1
correspond to the cycles in G.
Conversely, suppose that G has an abstract dual G⇤. For a proof
that G is planar, it suﬃces by Theorem 4.5.1 and Proposition 4.6.2 to
show that B(G⇤) has a sparse basis. By Proposition 1.9.2, it does.
⇤
The duality theory for both abstract and plane graphs can be ex-
tended to inﬁnite graphs. As these can have inﬁnite bonds, their duals
must then have ‘inﬁnite cycles’. Such things do indeed exist, and are
fascinating: they arise as topological circles in a space formed by the
graph and its ends; see Chapter 8.6.
Exercises
1.
Show that every graph can be embedded in R3 with all edges straight.
2.−Show directly by Lemma 4.1.2 that K3,3 is not planar.
3.
Here is an inductive ‘proof’ that every maximal plane graph of order > 4
is a plane triangulation of minimum degree 3.
The induction starts
with K4. For the induction step, consider an arbitrary maximal plane
graph G of order n > 4, and consider all possible ways of extending it to
a maximal plane graph G0 of order n + 1 by adding a new vertex v. No
matter how this is done, v will come to sit in a face of G, which by the
inductive assumption is bounded by a triangle. Since G0 is maximally
planar, v must be joined to all three vertices of that triangle. Clearly,
G0 is another plane triangulation, and δ(G0) = d(v) = 3.
(i)−Find the ﬂaw in this ‘proof’.
(ii) Find a counterexample, and explain why the ‘proof’ overlooks it.
4.
Show that every planar graph is a union of three forests.
5.
The ancient Greeks loved regular plane graphs whose faces were bounded
by cycles of the same length.
(i) Show that such graphs exist for only ﬁnitely many pairs (d, `) of
degree d > 3 and cycle length `. Can you give an upper bound?
(ii)+Show that there are only ﬁnitely many such plane graphs, up
to topological isomorphism.
6.
A fullerene is a molecule that is made up entirely of carbon atoms
forming a cubic plane graph all whose faces are pentagons or hexagons.
Show that, since carbon atoms can form double bonds, every such graph
can be realized in principle by (4-valent) carbon atoms.
Exercises

118
4. Planar Graphs
7.
A football is made of pentagons and hexagons, not necessarily of regular
shape. They are sewn together so that their seams form a cubic planar
graph. How many pentagons does the football have?
8.−(continued from Exercises 6 and 7)
Fullerenes are less stable if they contain adjacent pentagons. Show that
stable fullerenes have at least 60 carbon atoms.
9.
Let G be a graph of order n that is embedded in a surface of Euler
characteristic χ and cannot be embedded in a simpler surface (one of
larger Euler characteristic). Show that G has at most 3n −3χ edges.
(Hint. You may use that every face of such an embedded graph is a
topological disc. Such embeddings satisfy the general Euler formula,
n −m + ` = χ.)
10.
Find a direct proof for planar graphs of Tutte’s theorem on the cycle
space of 3-connected graphs (Theorem 3.2.6).
11.−Show that the two plane graphs in Figure 4.3.1 are not combinatorially
(and hence not topologically) isomorphic.
12.
Show that the two graphs in Figure 4.3.2 are combinatorially but not
topologically isomorphic.
13.−Show that our deﬁnition of equivalence for planar embeddings does
indeed deﬁne an equivalence relation.
14.
Find a 2-connected planar graph whose drawings are all topologically
isomorphic but whose planar embeddings are not all equivalent.
15.+ Show that every plane graph is combinatorially isomorphic to a plane
graph whose edges are all straight.
(Hint.
Given a plane triangulation, construct inductively a graph-
theoretically isomorphic plane graph whose edges are straight. Which
additional property of the inner faces could help with the induction?)
Do not use Kuratowski’s theorem in the following two exercises.
16.
Show that any minor of a planar graph is planar. Deduce that a graph
is planar if and only if it is the minor of a grid. (Grids are deﬁned in
Chapter 12.4.)
17.
(i) Show that the planar graphs can in principle be characterized as in
Kuratowski’s theorem: that there exists a set X of graphs such that a
graph G is planar if and only if G has no minor in X.
(ii) Can every graph property be characterized in this way?
If not,
which can?
18.
Does every planar graph have a drawing with all inner faces convex?
19.
Modify the proof of Lemma 4.4.3 so that all inner faces become convex.
20.
Does every minimal non-planar graph G (i.e., every non-planar graph G
whose proper subgraphs are all planar) contain an edge e such that
G −e is maximally planar? Does the answer change if we deﬁne ‘mini-
mal’ with respect to minors rather than subgraphs?

Exercises
119
21.
Show that adding a new edge to a maximal planar graph of order at
least 6 always produces both a TK5 and a TK3,3 subgraph.
22.
Prove the general Kuratowski theorem from its 3-connected case by
manipulating plane graphs, i.e. avoiding Lemma 4.4.5.
(This is not intended as an exercise in elementary topology; for the
topological parts of the proof, a rough sketch will do.)
23.−A graph is called outerplanar if it has a drawing in which every vertex
lies on the boundary of the outer face. Show that a graph is outerplanar
if and only if it contains neither K4 nor K2,3 as a minor.
24.
Show that a 2-connected plane graph is bipartite if and only if every
face is bounded by an even cycle.
25.
Let G = G1 [ G2, where |G1 \ G2| 6 1. Show that C(G) has a sparse
basis if both C(G1) and C(G2) have one.
26.
Find a cycle space basis among the face boundaries of a 2-connected
plane graph.
27.
Show that a 3-connected graph of order n has at least n/2 peripheral
cycles. Is this lower bound sharp?
28.+ Find an algebraic proof of Euler’s formula for 2-connected plane graphs,
along the following lines. Deﬁne the face space F (over F2) of such
a graph in analogy to its vertex space V and edge space E.
Deﬁne
boundary maps F ! E ! V in the obvious way, specifying them ﬁrst on
single faces or edges (i.e., on the standard bases of F and E) and then
extending these maps linearly to all of F and E. Determine the kernels
and images of these homomorphisms, and derive Euler’s formula from
the dimensions of those subspaces of F, E and V.
A family of subgraphs of G is said to form a double cover of G if every edge of
G lies in exactly two of those subgraphs. A double cover by cycles is a cycle
double cover. A surface map is a graph embedded in a surface so that every
face is bounded by a cycle.
29.
(for topologists)
(i) Show that a cubic graph has a cycle double cover if and only if it
isomorphic to a surface map.
(ii) Does every cycle double cover of a cubic graph occur as the family
of face boundaries of a surface graph isomorphic to it?
(iii) Is the assumption of being cubic relevant in (ii)?
Given a 2-connected graph G = (V, E) and an integer χ, call another graph
H = (W, E) with the same edge set E as G an abstract dual of G with para-
meter χ if all the atomic bonds of G are cycles in H and |V | −|E| + |W| = χ.
30.+ (continuing Exercise 29)
Show that a graph is isomorphic to a surface map for a surface of Euler
characteristic χ if and only if it has an abstract dual with parameter χ.
You may use the results from Appendix B as needed.

120
4. Planar Graphs
31.
Let G be a 2-connected graph whose cycle space is generated by a sparse
set C0 of cycles. From MacLane’s theorem we know that G even admits
a double cover by cycles generating C(G): the face boundaries in any
drawing of G. Show directly (without using MacLane’s theorem) that
C0 extends to a cycle double cover D of G.
32.+ (for topologists) Prove the non-trivial implication in MacLane’s the-
orem constructively, as follows.
Assume that the given graph G is
2-connected and, by the previous exercise, has a double cover D by
cycles generating C(G).
For each of these cycles C take a disc and
identify its boundary with C.
(i) Show that the space obtained is a surface, i.e., a compact 2-
manifold without boundary.
(ii) Use Theorem 1.9.5 to show that this surface has Euler char-
acteristic at least 2. (This implies that it must be the sphere,
a fact you may assume as known.)
33.
Deduce from the last two exercises that, given any 2-connected planar
graph and a sparse basis C0 of C(G) consisting of cycles, there is a
drawing of G in which the cycles in C0 are precisely the boundaries of
the inner faces.
34.+ Let C be a closed curve in the plane that intersects itself at most once
in any given point of the plane, and where every such self-intersection
is a proper crossing. Call C alternating if we can turn these crossings
into over- and underpasses in such a way that when we run along the
curve the overpasses alternate with the underpasses.
(i) Prove that every such curve is alternating, or ﬁnd a counterex-
ample.
(ii) Does the solution to (i) change if the curves considered are not
closed?
35.−What does the plane dual of a plane tree look like?
36.−Show that the plane dual of a plane multigraph is connected.
37.+ Show that a connected plane multigraph has a plane dual.
38.
Show that any two plane duals of a plane multigraph are combinatori-
ally isomorphic.
39.
Let G⇤be an abstract dual of G, and let e = e⇤be an edge. Prove the
following two assertions:
(i) G⇤/e⇤is an abstract dual of G −e.
(ii)+ G⇤−e⇤is an abstract dual of G/e.
40.
Find a connected graph that has two non-isomorphic abstract duals.
Can you ﬁnd a 2-connected example?
41.
Let G, G⇤be dual plane graphs. Prove the following statements:
(i) If G is 2-connected, then G⇤is 2-connected.
(ii) If G is 3-connected, then G⇤is 3-connected.
(iii) If G is 4-connected, then G⇤need not be 4-connected.

Notes
121
42.
Give detailed proofs for the statements made after Proposition 4.6.2,
except for the uniqueness of G⇤(which is proved in Exercise 43 (ii)).
43.
Let G⇤= (V ⇤, E⇤) be a connected abstract dual of a connected multi-
graph G = (V, E). Does G have a drawing whose plane dual is isomor-
phic to G⇤? (Perhaps even ‘canonically’ isomorphic? In which sense?)
(i) For 2-connected G, prove this using the approach of Exercise 32.
(ii) Deduce that abstract duals of 3-connected graphs are unique.
(What exactly could this mean? Suggest a deﬁnition of unique-
ness that is stronger than ‘up to isomorphism’.)
(iii) Find a counterexample to the general statement.
44.
Show that the following statements are equivalent for connected multi-
graphs G = (V, E) and G0 = (V 0, E) with the same edge set:
(i) G and G0 are abstract duals of each other;
(ii) given any set F ✓E, the multigraph (V, F) is a tree if and only
if (V 0, E r F) is a tree.
Notes
There is a very thorough monograph on the embedding of graphs in surfaces,
including the plane: B. Mohar & C. Thomassen, Graphs on Surfaces, Johns
Hopkins University Press 2001. Proofs of the results cited in Section 4.1, as
well as all references for this chapter, can be found there. A good account
of the Jordan curve theorem, both polygonal and general, is given also in
J. Stillwell, Classical topology and combinatorial group theory, Springer 1980.
The short proof of Corollary 4.2.10 uses a trick that deserves special
mention: the so-called double counting of pairs, illustrated in the text by
a bipartite graph whose edges can be counted alternatively by summing its
degrees on the left or on the right. Double counting is a technique widely used
in combinatorics, and there will be more examples later in the book.
The material of Section 4.3 is not normally standard for an introductory
graph theory course, and the rest of the chapter can be read independently of
this section. However, the results of Section 4.3 are by no means unimportant.
In a way, they have fallen victim to their own success: the shift from a topo-
logical to a combinatorial setting for planarity problems which they achieve
has made the topological techniques developed there dispensable for most of
planarity theory.
In its original version, Kuratowski’s theorem was stated only for topo-
logical minors; the version for general minors was added by Wagner in 1937.
Our proof of the 3-connected case (Lemma 4.4.3) is a weakening of a proof due
to C. Thomassen, Planarity and duality of ﬁnite and inﬁnite graphs, J. Comb.
Theory, Ser. B 29 (1980), 244–271, which yields a drawing in which all the
inner faces are convex (Exercise 19). The existence of such ‘convex’ drawings
for 3-connected planar graphs follows already from the theorem of Steinitz
(1922) that these graphs are precisely the 1-skeletons of 3-dimensional convex
polyhedra. Compare also W.T. Tutte, How to draw a graph, Proc. Lond. Math.
Soc. 13 (1963), 743–767.
