[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 5. Colouring
현재 소단원: 5.1 Colouring maps and planar graphs
직전 소단원: 「4.ex Exercises」
[본문]
5
Colouring
How many colours do we need to colour the countries of a map in such
a way that adjacent countries are coloured di↵erently? How many days
have to be scheduled for committee meetings of a parliament if every
committee intends to meet for one day and some members of parliament
serve on several committees? How can we ﬁnd a school timetable of min-
imum total length, based on the information of how often each teacher
has to teach each class?
A vertex colouring of a graph G = (V, E) is a map c: V ! S such
vertex
colouring
that c(v) 6= c(w) whenever v and w are adjacent. The elements of the
set S are called the available colours. All that interests us about S is
its size: typically, we shall be asking for the smallest integer k such that
G has a k-colouring, a vertex colouring c: V ! {1, . . . , k}. This k is the
chromatic
number
(vertex-) chromatic number of G; it is denoted by χ(G). A graph G with
χ(G)
χ(G) = k is called k-chromatic; if χ(G) 6 k, we call G k-colourable.
1
1
2
3
2
4
Fig. 5.0.1. A vertex colouring V ! {1, . . . , 4}
Note that a k-colouring is nothing but a vertex partition into k
independent sets, now called colour classes; the non-trivial 2-colourable
colour
classes
graphs, for example, are precisely the bipartite graphs.
Historically,
the colouring terminology comes from the map colouring problem stated
123
R. Diestel, Graph Theory, Graduate Texts in Mathematics 173,  
© Reinhard Diestel, under licence (exclusive for the print edition) 2025
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-70107-2_5

124
5. Colouring
above, which leads to the problem of determining the maximum chro-
matic number of planar graphs. The committee scheduling problem, too,
can be phrased as a vertex colouring problem – how?
An edge colouring of G = (V, E) is a map c: E !S with c(e) 6= c(f)
edge
colouring
for any adjacent edges e, f. The smallest integer k for which a k-edge-
colouring exists, i.e. an edge colouring c: E ! {1, . . . , k}, is the edge-
chromatic number, or chromatic index, of G; it is denoted by χ0(G).
chromatic
index
χ0(G)
The third of our introductory questions can be modelled as an edge
colouring problem in a bipartite multigraph (how?).
Clearly, every edge colouring of G is a vertex colouring of its line
graph L(G), and vice versa; in particular, χ0(G) = χ(L(G)). The prob-
lem of ﬁnding good edge colourings may thus be viewed as a restriction
of the more general vertex colouring problem to this special class of
graphs.
As we shall see, this relationship between the two types of
colouring problem is reﬂected by a marked di↵erence in our knowledge
about their solutions: while there are only very rough estimates for χ,
its sister χ0 always takes one of two values, either ∆or ∆+ 1.
5.1 Colouring maps and planar graphs
If any result in graph theory has a claim to be known to the world
outside, it is the following four colour theorem (which implies that every
map can be coloured with at most four colours):
Theorem 5.1.1. (Four Colour Theorem)
Every planar graph is 4-colourable.
Some remarks about the proof of the four colour theorem and its history
can be found in the notes at the end of this chapter. Here, we prove the
following weakening:
Proposition 5.1.2. (Five Colour Theorem)
Every planar graph is 5-colourable.
First proof. Let G be a plane graph with n > 6 vertices and m edges.
(4.1.1)
(4.2.10)
We assume inductively that every plane graph with fewer than n vertices
can be 5-coloured. By Corollary 4.2.10,
n, m
d(G) = 2m/n 6 2 (3n −6)/n < 6 ;
let v 2 G be a vertex of degree at most 5. By the induction hypothesis,
v
the graph H := G −v has a vertex colouring c: V (H) ! {1, . . . , 5}. If c
H
uses at most 4 colours for the neighbours of v, we can extend it to a 5-
c
colouring of G. Let us assume, therefore, that v has exactly 5 neighbours,
and that these have distinct colours.

5.1 Colouring maps and planar graphs
125
Let D be an open disc around v, so small that it meets only those
D
ﬁve straight edge segments of G that contain v. Let us enumerate these
segments according to their cyclic position in D as s1, . . . , s5, and let
s1, . . . , s5
vvi be the edge containing si (i = 1, . . . , 5; Fig. 5.1.1). Without loss of
v1, . . . , v5
generality we may assume that c(vi) = i for each i.
v1
v2
v3
v4
v5
s1
s2
s3
s4
s5
v
P
D
Fig. 5.1.1. The proof of the ﬁve colour theorem
Let us show ﬁrst that every v1– v3 path P ✓H −{v2, v4} sepa-
P
rates v2 from v4 in H. Clearly, this is the case if and only if the cycle
C := vv1Pv3v separates v2 from v4 in G. We prove this by showing that
C
v2 and v4 lie in di↵erent faces of C.
Let us pick an inner point x2 of s2 in D and an inner point x4 of
s4 in D. Then in D r (s1 [ s3) ✓R2 r C every point can be linked by
a polygonal arc to x2 or to x4. This implies that x2 and x4 (and hence
also v2 and v4) lie in di↵erent faces of C: otherwise D would meet only
one of the two faces of C, which would contradict the fact that v lies on
the frontier of both these faces (Theorem 4.1.1).
Given i, j 2 {1, . . . , 5}, let Hi,j be the subgraph of H induced by
Hi,j
the vertices coloured i or j. We may assume that the component C1 of
H1,3 containing v1 also contains v3. Indeed, if we interchange the colours
1 and 3 at all the vertices of C1, we obtain another 5-colouring of H;
if v3 /2 C1, then v1 and v3 are both coloured 3 in this new colouring,
and we may assign colour 1 to v. Thus, H1,3 contains a v1– v3 path P.
As shown above, P separates v2 from v4 in H. Since P \ H2,4 = ;,
this means that v2 and v4 lie in di↵erent components of H2,4. In the
component containing v2, we now interchange the colours 2 and 4, thus
recolouring v2 with colour 4. Now v no longer has a neighbour coloured 2,
and we may give it this colour.
⇤
Second proof. As in the ﬁrst proof, we assume inductively that every
(4.2.10)
(4.2.11)
(4.4.6)
planar graph with fewer than |G| vertices can be 5-coloured, and ﬁnd
a vertex v in G of degree 5. Since K5 6✓G by Corollary 4.2.11, this
v
vertex v has non-adjacent neighbours u, w. Let P = {u, v, w}.
Since minors of planar graphs are again planar, e.g. by Kuratowski’s
theorem, G/P has a 5-colouring by the induction hypothesis. This in-

126
5. Colouring
duces a 5-colouring of G −v in which u and w receive the same colour,
that of vP from our colouring of G/P.
The neighbours of v in this
colouring of G −v thus use at most four colours, and we can colour v
with the ﬁfth colour.
⇤
As a backdrop to the two famous theorems above, let us cite another
well-known result:
Theorem 5.1.3. (Gr¨otzsch 1959)
Every planar graph not containing a triangle is 3-colourable.
5.2 Colouring vertices
How do we determine the chromatic number of a given graph? How can
we ﬁnd a vertex-colouring with as few colours as possible? How does
the chromatic number relate to other graph invariants, such as average
degree, connectivity or girth?
Straight from the deﬁnition of the chromatic number we may derive
the following upper bound:
Proposition 5.2.1. Every graph G with m edges satisﬁes
χ(G) 6 1
2 +
q
2m + 1
4 .
Proof. Let c be a vertex colouring of G with k = χ(G) colours. Then
G has at least one edge between any two colour classes: if not, we could
have used the same colour for both classes. Thus, m > 1
2k(k−1). Solving
this inequality for k, we obtain the assertion claimed.
⇤
One obvious way to colour a graph G with not too many colours is
the following greedy algorithm: starting from a ﬁxed vertex enumeration
greedy
algorithm
v1, . . . , vn of G, we consider the vertices in turn and colour each vi with
the ﬁrst available colour – e.g., with the smallest positive integer not
already used to colour any neighbour of vi among v1, . . . , vi−1. In this
way, we never use more than ∆(G) + 1 colours, even for unfavourable
choices of the enumeration v1, . . . , vn. If G is complete or an odd cycle,
then this is even best possible.
In general, though, this upper bound of ∆+ 1 is rather generous,
even for greedy colourings. Indeed, when we come to colour the vertex vi
in the above algorithm, we only need a supply of dG[v1,...,vi](vi)+1 rather
than dG(vi) + 1 colours to proceed; recall that, at this stage, the algo-
rithm ignores any neighbours vj of vi with j > i. Hence in most graphs,
