[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 5. Colouring
현재 소단원: 5.2 Colouring vertices
직전 소단원: 「5.1 Colouring maps and planar graphs」
[본문]
126
5. Colouring
duces a 5-colouring of G −v in which u and w receive the same colour,
that of vP from our colouring of G/P.
The neighbours of v in this
colouring of G −v thus use at most four colours, and we can colour v
with the ﬁfth colour.
⇤
As a backdrop to the two famous theorems above, let us cite another
well-known result:
Theorem 5.1.3. (Gr¨otzsch 1959)
Every planar graph not containing a triangle is 3-colourable.
5.2 Colouring vertices
How do we determine the chromatic number of a given graph? How can
we ﬁnd a vertex-colouring with as few colours as possible? How does
the chromatic number relate to other graph invariants, such as average
degree, connectivity or girth?
Straight from the deﬁnition of the chromatic number we may derive
the following upper bound:
Proposition 5.2.1. Every graph G with m edges satisﬁes
χ(G) 6 1
2 +
q
2m + 1
4 .
Proof. Let c be a vertex colouring of G with k = χ(G) colours. Then
G has at least one edge between any two colour classes: if not, we could
have used the same colour for both classes. Thus, m > 1
2k(k−1). Solving
this inequality for k, we obtain the assertion claimed.
⇤
One obvious way to colour a graph G with not too many colours is
the following greedy algorithm: starting from a ﬁxed vertex enumeration
greedy
algorithm
v1, . . . , vn of G, we consider the vertices in turn and colour each vi with
the ﬁrst available colour – e.g., with the smallest positive integer not
already used to colour any neighbour of vi among v1, . . . , vi−1. In this
way, we never use more than ∆(G) + 1 colours, even for unfavourable
choices of the enumeration v1, . . . , vn. If G is complete or an odd cycle,
then this is even best possible.
In general, though, this upper bound of ∆+ 1 is rather generous,
even for greedy colourings. Indeed, when we come to colour the vertex vi
in the above algorithm, we only need a supply of dG[v1,...,vi](vi)+1 rather
than dG(vi) + 1 colours to proceed; recall that, at this stage, the algo-
rithm ignores any neighbours vj of vi with j > i. Hence in most graphs,

5.2 Colouring vertices
127
there will be scope for an improvement of the ∆+1 bound by choosing a
particularly suitable vertex ordering to start with: one that picks vertices
of large degree early (when most neighbours are ignored) and vertices
of small degree last. Locally, the number dG[v1,...,vi](vi) + 1 of colours
required will be smallest if vi has minimum degree in G[v1, . . . , vi]. But
this is easily achieved: we just choose vn ﬁrst, with d(vn) = δ(G), then
choose as vn−1 a vertex of minimum degree in G −vn, and so on.
The least number k such that G has a vertex enumeration in which
each vertex is preceded by fewer than k of its neighbours is called
the colouring number col(G) of G. The enumeration we just discussed
colouring
number
col(G)
shows that col(G) 6 maxH✓G δ(H) + 1. But for H ✓G clearly also
col(G) > col(H) and col(H) > δ(H) + 1, since the ‘back-degree’ of the
last vertex in any enumeration of H is just its ordinary degree in H,
which is at least δ(H). So we have proved the following:
Proposition 5.2.2. Every graph G satisﬁes
χ(G) 6 col(G) = max { δ(H) | H ✓G } + 1 .
⇤
The colouring number of a graph is closely related to its arboricity; see
Exercise 14 and the remark following Theorem 2.4.3.
Proposition 5.2.2 shows that every k-chromatic graph has a sub-
graph of minimum degree at least k −1. In fact, it has a k-chromatic
such subgraph:
Lemma 5.2.3. Every k-chromatic graph has a k-chromatic subgraph of
[7.3]
[9.2.1]
[9.2.3]
[11.2.3]
minimum degree at least k −1.
Proof. Given G with χ(G) = k, let H ✓G be minimal with χ(H) = k.
If H had a vertex v of degree dH(v) 6 k −2, we could extend a (k −1)-
colouring of H −v to one of H, contradicting the choice of H.
⇤
As we have seen, every graph G satisﬁes χ(G) 6 ∆(G) + 1, with
equality for complete graphs and odd cycles.
In all other cases, this
general bound can be improved a little:
Theorem 5.2.4. (Brooks 1941)
Let G be a connected graph. If G is neither complete nor an odd cycle,
then
χ(G) 6 ∆(G) .

128
5. Colouring
Proof. We apply induction on |G|. If ∆(G) 6 2, then G is a path or a cy-
cle, and the assertion is trivial. We therefore assume that ∆:= ∆(G) > 3,
∆
and that the assertion holds for graphs of smaller order. Suppose that
χ(G) > ∆.
Let v 2 G be a vertex and H := G −v. Then χ(H) 6 ∆: by in-
v, H
duction, every component H0 of H satisﬁes χ(H0) 6 ∆(H0) 6 ∆unless
H0 is complete or an odd cycle, in which case χ(H0) = ∆(H0) + 1 6 ∆
as every vertex of H0 has maximum degree in H0 and one such vertex is
also adjacent to v in G.
Since H can be ∆-coloured but G cannot, we have the following:
Every ∆-colouring of H uses all the colours 1, . . . , ∆on
the neighbours of v; in particular, d(v) = ∆.
(1)
Given any ∆-colouring of H, let us denote the neighbour of v col-
oured i by vi, i = 1, . . . , ∆. For all i 6= j, let Hi,j denote the subgraph
v1, . . . , v∆
of H spanned by all the vertices coloured i or j.
Hi,j
For all i 6= j, the vertices vi and vj lie in a common com-
ponent Ci,j of Hi,j.
(2)
Otherwise we could interchange the colours i and j in one of those
components; then vi and vj would be coloured the same, contrary to (1).
Ci,j
Ci,j is always a vi– vj path.
(3)
Indeed, let P be a vi– vj path in Ci,j. As dH(vi) 6 ∆−1, the neighbours
of vi have pairwise di↵erent colours: otherwise we could recolour vi, con-
trary to (1). Hence the neighbour of vi on P is its only neighbour in Ci,j,
and similarly for vj. Thus if Ci,j 6= P, then P has an inner vertex with
three identically coloured neighbours in H; let u be the ﬁrst such vertex
on P (Fig. 5.2.1). Since at most ∆−2 colours are used on the neighbours
of u, we may recolour u. But this makes P˚u into a component of Hi,j,
contradicting (2).
vi
vj
P˚u
Ci,j
i
j
j
j
j
i
i
i
v
u
i
Fig. 5.2.1. The proof of (3) in Brooks’s theorem
For distinct i, j, k, the paths Ci,j and Ci,k meet only in vi.
(4)

5.2 Colouring vertices
129
For if vi 6= u 2 Ci,j \Ci,k, then u has two neighbours coloured j and two
coloured k, so we may recolour u. In the new colouring, vi and vj lie in
di↵erent components of Hi,j, contrary to (2).
The proof of the theorem now follows easily. If the neighbours of v
are pairwise adjacent, then each has ∆neighbours in N(v)[{v} already,
so G = G[N(v) [ {v}] = K∆+1. As G is complete, there is nothing to
show. We may thus assume that v1v2 /2 G, where v1, . . . , v∆derive their
v1, . . . , v∆
names from some ﬁxed ∆-colouring c of H. Let u 6= v2 be the neighbour
c
of v1 on the path C1,2; then c(u) = 2. Interchanging the colours 1 and 3
u
in C1,3, we obtain a new colouring c0 of H; let v0
i, H0
i,j, C0
i,j etc. be deﬁned
c0
with respect to c0 in the obvious way. As a neighbour of v1 = v0
3, our
vertex u now lies in C0
2,3 , since c0(u) = c(u) = 2. By (4) for c, however,
the path ˚v1C1,2 retained its original colouring, so u 2 ˚v1C1,2 ✓C0
1,2.
Hence u 2 C0
2,3 \ C0
1,2, contradicting (4) for c0.
⇤
We have so far seen some necessary conditions for high chromaticity,
in the form of upper bounds on χ. If χ(G) > k, for example, then also
∆> k (unless G is complete or an odd cycle), and G has a subgraph of
minimum degree at least k −1. These conditions are far from suﬃcient,
though: if G = Kn,n, say, they hold for all k 6 n but χ(G) = 2.
It would be nice also to have some suﬃcient conditions for χ > k. If
they are easy to check, they might provide useful certiﬁcates for why we
are unable to colour a given graph with few colours. If they could even
be shown to be necessary too, they would ‘explain’ why certain graphs
are highly chromatic – just as the marriage condition in Hall’s theorem
‘explains’ why certain matchings in bipartite graphs fail: its violation
clearly prevents a graph from having the desired matching, and it is
violated every time such a matching fails to exist.
For example, we might try to determine the class Xk of ✓-minimal
graphs that cannot be coloured with fewer than k colours. As is easy
to check (cf. Lemma 12.6.1.), a given graph G satisﬁes χ(G) > k if and
(12.6.1)
only if it has a subgraph in Xk, just as in Kuratowski’s planarity theo-
rem with minors or topological minors. So containing any graph from Xk
is a certiﬁcate for χ > k, and these certiﬁcates together ‘explain’ this
phenomenon in the sense discussed.
But will these certiﬁcates be easy to ﬁnd in an arbitrary k-chromatic
graph, or at least easy to check? That is, will it be easy to verify that a
given graph X 2 Xk is indeed in Xk, or even just that χ(X) > k? We
shall return to this question in a moment.
One obvious suﬃcient condition for χ(G) > k is that Kk ✓G. But
this condition is not necessary: as Theorem 5.2.5 will show, k-chromatic
graphs need not even contain a triangle. Hence while Kk certainly lies
in Xk, it is not its only element. Conversely, Lemma 5.2.3 implies that all
the graphs in Xk have minimum degree at least k −1; but not all graphs
of minimum degree k −1 are in Xk, since they need not satisfy χ > k.

130
5. Colouring
The following theorem of Erd˝os implies that Xk cannot be ﬁnite.
In fact, it implies that for no k is there a ﬁnite set X of graphs X with
χ(X) > 3 such that every k-chromatic graph has a subgraph in X:
Theorem 5.2.5. (Erd˝os 1959)
[9.2.3]
For every integer k there exists a graph G with girth g(G) > k and
chromatic number χ(G) > k.
Theorem 5.2.5 was ﬁrst proved non-constructively using random
graphs, and we shall give this proof in Chapter 11.2. Constructing graphs
of large chromatic number and girth directly is not easy; cf. Exercise 22
for the simplest case.
The message of Erd˝os’s theorem is that, contrary perhaps to what
we had hoped, large chromatic number can occur as a purely global
phenomenon: locally, around each vertex, a graph of large girth looks
just like a tree, and in particular is 2-colourable there. But what exactly
can cause high chromaticity as a global phenomenon remains a mystery.
Nevertheless, there exists a simple – though not always short – pro-
cedure to construct all the graphs of chromatic number at least k. For
each k 2 N, let us deﬁne the class of k-constructible graphs recursively
k-con-
structible
as follows:
(i) Kk is k-constructible.
(ii) If G is k-constructible and two vertices x, y of G are non-adjacent,
then also (G + xy)/xy is k-constructible.
(iii) If G1, G2 are k-constructible and there are vertices x, y1, y2 such
that G1 \ G2 = {x} and xy1 2 E(G1) and xy2 2 E(G2), then also
(G1 [ G2) −xy1 −xy2 + y1y2 is k-constructible (Fig. 5.2.2).
y1
y2
y1
y2
x
x
x
1
G
2
G
=
Fig. 5.2.2. The Haj´os construction (iii)
One easily checks inductively that all k-constructible graphs – and
hence their supergraphs – are at least k-chromatic. For example, any
colouring of the graph (G + xy)/xy in (ii) induces a colouring of G, and
hence by inductive assumption uses at least k colours. Similarly, in any
colouring of the graph constructed in (iii) the vertices y1 and y2 do not
both have the same colour as x, so this colouring induces a colouring of
either G1 or G2 and hence uses at least k colours.
It is remarkable, though, that the converse holds too:

131
Theorem 5.2.6. (Haj´os 1961)
Let G be a graph and k 2 N. Then χ(G) > k if and only if G has a k-
constructible subgraph.
Proof.
Let G be a graph with χ(G) > k; we show that G has a k-
constructible subgraph. Suppose not; then k > 3. Adding some edges
if necessary, let us make G edge-maximal with the property that none
of its subgraphs is k-constructible. Now G is not a complete r-partite
graph for any r: for then χ(G) > k would imply r > k, and G would
contain the k-constructible graph Kk.
Since G is not a complete multipartite graph, non-adjacency is not
an equivalence relation on V (G). So there are vertices y1, x, y2 such that
y1x, xy2 /2 E(G) but y1y2 2 E(G). Since G is edge-maximal without
x, y1, y2
a k-constructible subgraph, each edge xyi lies in some k-constructible
subgraph Hi of G + xyi (i = 1, 2).
H1, H2
Let H0
2 be an isomorphic copy of H2 that contains x and H2 −H1
H0
2
but is otherwise disjoint from G, together with an isomorphism v 7! v0
v0 etc.
from H2 to H0
2 that ﬁxes H2 \ H0
2 pointwise. Then H1 \ H0
2 = {x}, so
H := (H1 [ H0
2) −xy1 −xy0
2 + y1y0
2
is k-constructible by (iii). One vertex at a time, let us identify in H each
vertex v0 2 H0
2 −G with its partner v; since vv0 is never an edge of H,
each of these identiﬁcations amounts to a construction step of type (ii).
Eventually, we obtain the graph
(H1 [ H2) −xy1 −xy2 + y1y2 ✓G ;
this is the desired k-constructible subgraph of G.
⇤
Does Haj´os’s theorem solve our Kuratowski-type problem for highly
chromatic graphs, which was to ﬁnd a class of graphs of chromatic num-
ber at least k with the property that every such graph has a subgraph
in this class?
Formally it does, albeit with an inﬁnite characterizing
class: the class of k-constructible graphs, which contains Xk.
Unlike
Kuratowski’s characterization of planar graphs, however, this does not –
at least not obviously – make Haj´os’s theorem a good characterization
of the graphs of chromatic number < k: as one can show, proving that
a given k-constructible graph is indeed k-constructible is just as hard as
proving that a graph of chromatic number > k does indeed need at least
k colours. See the notes for details.
5.3 Colouring edges
Clearly, every graph G satisﬁes χ0(G) > ∆(G). For bipartite graphs, we
have equality here:
5.3 Colouring edges
