[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 5. Colouring
현재 소단원: 5.3 Colouring edges
직전 소단원: 「5.2 Colouring vertices」
[본문]
131
Theorem 5.2.6. (Haj´os 1961)
Let G be a graph and k 2 N. Then χ(G) > k if and only if G has a k-
constructible subgraph.
Proof.
Let G be a graph with χ(G) > k; we show that G has a k-
constructible subgraph. Suppose not; then k > 3. Adding some edges
if necessary, let us make G edge-maximal with the property that none
of its subgraphs is k-constructible. Now G is not a complete r-partite
graph for any r: for then χ(G) > k would imply r > k, and G would
contain the k-constructible graph Kk.
Since G is not a complete multipartite graph, non-adjacency is not
an equivalence relation on V (G). So there are vertices y1, x, y2 such that
y1x, xy2 /2 E(G) but y1y2 2 E(G). Since G is edge-maximal without
x, y1, y2
a k-constructible subgraph, each edge xyi lies in some k-constructible
subgraph Hi of G + xyi (i = 1, 2).
H1, H2
Let H0
2 be an isomorphic copy of H2 that contains x and H2 −H1
H0
2
but is otherwise disjoint from G, together with an isomorphism v 7! v0
v0 etc.
from H2 to H0
2 that ﬁxes H2 \ H0
2 pointwise. Then H1 \ H0
2 = {x}, so
H := (H1 [ H0
2) −xy1 −xy0
2 + y1y0
2
is k-constructible by (iii). One vertex at a time, let us identify in H each
vertex v0 2 H0
2 −G with its partner v; since vv0 is never an edge of H,
each of these identiﬁcations amounts to a construction step of type (ii).
Eventually, we obtain the graph
(H1 [ H2) −xy1 −xy2 + y1y2 ✓G ;
this is the desired k-constructible subgraph of G.
⇤
Does Haj´os’s theorem solve our Kuratowski-type problem for highly
chromatic graphs, which was to ﬁnd a class of graphs of chromatic num-
ber at least k with the property that every such graph has a subgraph
in this class?
Formally it does, albeit with an inﬁnite characterizing
class: the class of k-constructible graphs, which contains Xk.
Unlike
Kuratowski’s characterization of planar graphs, however, this does not –
at least not obviously – make Haj´os’s theorem a good characterization
of the graphs of chromatic number < k: as one can show, proving that
a given k-constructible graph is indeed k-constructible is just as hard as
proving that a graph of chromatic number > k does indeed need at least
k colours. See the notes for details.
5.3 Colouring edges
Clearly, every graph G satisﬁes χ0(G) > ∆(G). For bipartite graphs, we
have equality here:
5.3 Colouring edges

132
5. Colouring
Proposition 5.3.1. (K¨onig 1916)
[5.4.5]
Every bipartite graph G satisﬁes χ0(G) = ∆(G).
Proof. We apply induction on kGk. For kGk = 0 the assertion holds.
(1.6.1)
Now assume that kGk > 1, and that the assertion holds for graphs with
fewer edges. Let ∆:= ∆(G), pick an edge xy 2 G, and choose a ∆-
∆, xy
edge-colouring of G −xy by the induction hypothesis. Let us refer to
the edges coloured ↵as ↵-edges, etc.
↵-edge
In G −xy, each of x and y is incident with at most ∆−1 edges.
Hence there are ↵, β 2 {1, . . . , ∆} such that x is not incident with an
↵, β
↵-edge and y is not incident with a β-edge. If ↵= β, we can colour the
edge xy with this colour and are done; so we may assume that ↵6= β,
and that x is incident with a β-edge.
Let us extend this edge to a maximal walk W from x whose edges are
coloured β and ↵alternately. Since no such walk contains a vertex twice
(why not?), W exists and is a path. Moreover, W does not contain y:
if it did, it would end in y on an ↵-edge (by the choice of β) and thus
have even length, so W +xy would be an odd cycle in G (cf. Proposition
1.6.1). We now recolour all the edges on W, swapping ↵with β. By the
choice of ↵and the maximality of W, adjacent edges of G −xy are still
coloured di↵erently. We have thus found a ∆-edge-colouring of G −xy
in which neither x nor y is incident with a β-edge. Colouring xy with β,
we extend this colouring to a ∆-edge-colouring of G.
⇤
Theorem 5.3.2. (Vizing 1964)
Every graph G satisﬁes
∆(G) 6 χ0(G) 6 ∆(G) + 1 .
Proof. We prove the second inequality by induction on kGk. For kGk = 0
V, E
it is trivial. For the induction step let G = (V, E) with ∆:= ∆(G) > 0 be
∆
given, and assume that the assertion holds for graphs with fewer edges.
Instead of ‘(∆+ 1)-edge-colouring’ let us just say ‘colouring’.
colouring
For every edge e 2 G there exists a colouring of G −e, by the
induction hypothesis. In such a colouring, the edges at a given vertex
v use at most d(v) 6 ∆colours, so some colour β 2 {1, . . . , ∆+ 1} is
missing at v. For any other colour ↵, there is a unique maximal walk
missing
(possibly trivial) starting at v, whose edges are coloured alternately ↵
and β. This walk is a path; we call it the ↵/β - path from v.
↵/β - path
Suppose that G has no colouring. Then the following holds:
Given xy 2 E, and any colouring of G −xy in which the
colour ↵is missing at x and the colour β is missing at y,
the ↵/β - path from y ends in x.
(⇤)

5.3 Colouring edges
133
Otherwise we could interchange the colours ↵and β along this path and
colour xy with ↵, obtaining a colouring of G (contradiction).
Let xy0 2 G be an edge. By induction, G0 := G −xy0 has a col-
ouring c0. Let ↵be a colour missing at x in this colouring. Further, let
↵
y0, . . . , yk be a maximal sequence of distinct neighbours of x in G such
that c0(xyi+1) is missing in c0 at yi for every i < k. For each of the
graphs Gi := G −xyi we deﬁne a colouring ci, setting
Gi
ci(e) :=
⇢
c0(xyj+1)
for e = xyj with j 2 {0, . . . , i −1}
c0(e)
otherwise;
ci
note that in each of these colourings the same colours are missing at x
as in c0.
Now let β be a colour missing at yk in c0. By (⇤), the ↵/β - path P
β
from yk in Gk (with respect to ck) ends in x, with an edge yx coloured β
since ↵is missing at x. Since y cannot serve as yk+1, by the maximality
of the sequence y0, . . . , yk, we thus have y = yi for some 0 6 i < k
(Fig. 5.3.1). By deﬁnition of ck, therefore, β = ck(xyi) = c0(xyi+1). By
the choice of yi+1 this means that β was missing at yi in c0, and hence
also in ci. Now the ↵/β - path P 0 from yi in Gi with respect to ci starts
with yiPyk, since the edges of P˚x are coloured the same in ci as in ck.
But in c0, and hence in ci, there is no edge at yk coloured β. Therefore
P 0 ends in yk, contradicting (⇤).
⇤
Gk
yi+1
yi
yk
x
P
y0
↵
↵
↵
↵
β
β
β
β
Fig. 5.3.1. The ↵/β - path P in Gk = G −xyk
Vizing’s theorem divides the ﬁnite graphs into two classes according
to their chromatic index; graphs satisfying χ0 = ∆are called (imagina-
tively) class 1, those with χ0 = ∆+ 1 are class 2. There is no good
characterization theorem that enables us to tell these classes apart, be-
cause no easily checkable ‘certiﬁcate’ is known for a graph to be class 2.
Regular graphs of large even order and large degree are class 1:
Theorem 5.3.3. (Csaba, K¨uhn, Lo, Osthus, Treglown 2016)
There exists an n0 2 N such that, for all even n > n0 and d > n/2, every
d-regular graph G of order n satisﬁes χ0(G) = ∆(G).

134
5. Colouring
5.4 List colouring
In this section, we take a look at a relatively recent generalization of the
concepts of colouring studied so far. This generalization may seem a little
far-fetched at ﬁrst glance, but it turns out to supply a fundamental link
between the classical (vertex and edge) chromatic numbers of a graph
and its other invariants.
Suppose we are given a graph G = (V, E), and for each vertex of
G a list of colours permitted at that particular vertex: when can we
colour G (in the usual sense) so that each vertex receives a colour from
its list? More formally, let (Sv)v 2V be a family of sets. We call a vertex
colouring c of G with c(v) 2 Sv for all v
2 V a colouring from the
lists Sv. The graph G is called k-list-colourable, or k-choosable, if, for
k-choosable
every family (Sv)v 2V with |Sv| = k for all v, there is a vertex colouring
of G from the lists Sv. The least integer k for which G is k-choosable is
the list-chromatic number, or choice number ch(G) of G.
choice
number
ch(G)
List-colourings of edges are deﬁned analogously.
The least inte-
ger k such that G has an edge colouring from any family of lists of
size k is the list-chromatic index ch0(G) of G; formally, we just set
ch0(G) := ch(L(G)), where L(G) is the line graph of G.
ch0(G)
In principle, showing that a given graph is k-choosable is more diﬃ-
cult than proving it to be k-colourable: the latter is just the special case
of the former where all lists are equal to {1, . . . , k}. Thus,
ch(G) > χ(G)
and
ch0(G) > χ0(G)
for all graphs G.
In spite of these inequalities, many of the known upper bounds for
the chromatic number have turned out to be valid for the choice num-
ber, too. Examples for this phenomenon include Brooks’s theorem and
Proposition 5.2.2; in particular, graphs of large choice number still have
subgraphs of large minimum degree. On the other hand, it is easy to con-
struct graphs for which the two invariants are wide apart (Exercise 30).
Taken together, these two facts indicate a little how far those general
upper bounds on the chromatic number may be from the truth.
The following theorem shows that, in terms of its relationship to
other graph invariants, the choice number di↵ers fundamentally from the
chromatic number. As mentioned before, there are 2-chromatic graphs of
arbitrarily large minimum degree, e.g. the graphs Kn,n. The choice num-
ber, however, will be forced up by large values of invariants like δ, " or :
Theorem 5.4.1. (Alon 1993)
There exists a function f: N!N such that, given any integer k, all graphs
G with average degree d(G) > f(k) satisfy ch(G) > k.
