[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 5. Colouring
현재 소단원: 5.4 List colouring
직전 소단원: 「5.3 Colouring edges」
[본문]
134
5. Colouring
5.4 List colouring
In this section, we take a look at a relatively recent generalization of the
concepts of colouring studied so far. This generalization may seem a little
far-fetched at ﬁrst glance, but it turns out to supply a fundamental link
between the classical (vertex and edge) chromatic numbers of a graph
and its other invariants.
Suppose we are given a graph G = (V, E), and for each vertex of
G a list of colours permitted at that particular vertex: when can we
colour G (in the usual sense) so that each vertex receives a colour from
its list? More formally, let (Sv)v 2V be a family of sets. We call a vertex
colouring c of G with c(v) 2 Sv for all v
2 V a colouring from the
lists Sv. The graph G is called k-list-colourable, or k-choosable, if, for
k-choosable
every family (Sv)v 2V with |Sv| = k for all v, there is a vertex colouring
of G from the lists Sv. The least integer k for which G is k-choosable is
the list-chromatic number, or choice number ch(G) of G.
choice
number
ch(G)
List-colourings of edges are deﬁned analogously.
The least inte-
ger k such that G has an edge colouring from any family of lists of
size k is the list-chromatic index ch0(G) of G; formally, we just set
ch0(G) := ch(L(G)), where L(G) is the line graph of G.
ch0(G)
In principle, showing that a given graph is k-choosable is more diﬃ-
cult than proving it to be k-colourable: the latter is just the special case
of the former where all lists are equal to {1, . . . , k}. Thus,
ch(G) > χ(G)
and
ch0(G) > χ0(G)
for all graphs G.
In spite of these inequalities, many of the known upper bounds for
the chromatic number have turned out to be valid for the choice num-
ber, too. Examples for this phenomenon include Brooks’s theorem and
Proposition 5.2.2; in particular, graphs of large choice number still have
subgraphs of large minimum degree. On the other hand, it is easy to con-
struct graphs for which the two invariants are wide apart (Exercise 30).
Taken together, these two facts indicate a little how far those general
upper bounds on the chromatic number may be from the truth.
The following theorem shows that, in terms of its relationship to
other graph invariants, the choice number di↵ers fundamentally from the
chromatic number. As mentioned before, there are 2-chromatic graphs of
arbitrarily large minimum degree, e.g. the graphs Kn,n. The choice num-
ber, however, will be forced up by large values of invariants like δ, " or :
Theorem 5.4.1. (Alon 1993)
There exists a function f: N!N such that, given any integer k, all graphs
G with average degree d(G) > f(k) satisfy ch(G) > k.

5.4 List colouring
135
The proof of Theorem 5.4.1 uses probabilistic methods as introduced in
Chapter 11.
Although statements of the form ch(G) 6 k are formally stronger
than the corresponding statement of χ(G) 6 k, they can be easier to
prove. A pretty example is the list version of the ﬁve colour theorem:
every planar graph is 5-choosable. The proof of this does not use the
ﬁve colour theorem (or even Euler’s formula, on which the proof of the
ﬁve colour theorem is based). We thus reobtain the ﬁve colour theorem
as a corollary, with a very di↵erent proof.
Theorem 5.4.2. (Thomassen 1994)
Every planar graph is 5-choosable.
Proof. We shall prove the following assertion for all plane graphs G with
(4.2.8)
at least 3 vertices:
Suppose that every inner face of G is bounded by a trian-
gle and its outer face by a cycle C = v1 . . . vkv1. Suppose
further that v1 has already been coloured with the col-
our 1, and v2 has been coloured 2. Suppose ﬁnally that
with every other vertex of C a list of at least 3 colours is
associated, and with every vertex of G−C a list of at least
5 colours. Then the colouring of v1 and v2 can be extended
to a colouring of G from the given lists.
(⇤)
Let us check ﬁrst that (⇤) implies the assertion of the theorem.
Let any plane graph be given, together with a list of 5 colours for each
vertex. Add edges to this graph until it is a maximal plane graph G.
By Proposition 4.2.8, G is a plane triangulation; let v1v2v3v1 be the
boundary of its outer face. We now colour v1 and v2 (di↵erently) from
their lists, and extend this colouring by (⇤) to a colouring of G from the
lists given.
v2 = w
v1
v
G1
G2
1
2
Fig. 5.4.1. The induction step with a chord vw; here the case
of w = v2

136
5. Colouring
Let us now prove (⇤), by induction on |G|. If |G| = 3, then G = C
and the assertion is trivial.
Now let |G| > 4, and assume (⇤) for
smaller graphs. If C has a chord vw, then vw lies on two unique cy-
vw
cles C1, C2 ✓C + vw with v1v2 2 C1 and v1v2 /2 C2. For i = 1, 2, let
Gi denote the subgraph of G induced by the vertices lying on Ci or in
its inner face (Fig. 5.4.1). Applying the induction hypothesis ﬁrst to G1
and then – with the colours now assigned to v and w – to G2 yields the
desired colouring of G.
If C has no chord, let v1, u1, . . . , um, vk−1 be the neighbours of vk
u1, . . . , um
in their natural cyclic order around vk;1 by deﬁnition of C, all those
neighbours ui lie in the inner face of C (Fig. 5.4.2). As the inner faces
of C are bounded by triangles, P := v1u1 . . . umvk−1 is a path in G, and
C0 := P [ (C −vk) a cycle.
C0
v1
v2
C0
vk−1
vk
u1
u2
u3
P
Fig. 5.4.2. The induction step without a chord
We now choose two di↵erent colours j, ` 6= 1 from the list of vk and
delete these colours from the lists of all the vertices ui. Then every list of
a vertex on C0 still has at least 3 colours, so by induction we may colour
C0 and its interior, i.e. the graph G −vk. At least one of the two colours
j, ` is not used for vk−1, and we may assign that colour to vk.
⇤
As is often the case with induction proofs, the key to the proof above
lies in its delicately balanced strengthening of the assertion proved. Com-
pared with ordinary colouring, the task of ﬁnding a suitable strengthen-
ing is helped greatly by the possibility to give di↵erent vertices lists of
di↵erent lengths, and thus to tailor the colouring problem more ﬁttingly
to the structure of the graph. This suggests that maybe in other unsolved
colouring problems too it might be of advantage to aim straight for their
list version, i.e. to prove an assertion of the form ch(G) 6 k instead of
the formally weaker χ(G) 6 k. Unfortunately, this approach fails for the
four colour theorem: planar graphs are not in general 4-choosable.
1 as in the ﬁrst proof of the ﬁve colour theorem

5.4 List colouring
137
As mentioned before, the chromatic number of a graph and its choice
number may di↵er a lot. Surprisingly, however, no such examples are
known for edge colourings. Indeed it has been conjectured that none
exist:
List Colouring Conjecture. Every graph G satisﬁes ch0(G) = χ0(G).
We shall prove the list colouring conjecture for bipartite graphs. As
a tool we shall use orientations of graphs, deﬁned in Chapter 1.10. If D
is a directed graph and v 2 V (D), we denote by N +(v) the set, and by
N+(v)
d+(v) the number, of vertices w such that D contains an edge directed
d+(v)
from v to w.
To see how orientations come into play in the context of colouring,
recall the greedy algorithm from Section 5.2. This colours the vertices
of a graph G in turn, following a previously ﬁxed ordering (v1, . . . , vn),
with the smallest available colour. This ordering deﬁnes an orientation
of G if we orient every edge vivj ‘backwards’, that is, from vj to vi if
i < j. Then to determine a colour for vj the algorithm only looks at
previously coloured neighbours of vj, those to which vj sends a directed
edge. In particular, if d+(v) < k for all vertices v, the algorithm will use
at most k colours.
If we rewrite the proof of this fact (rather awkwardly) as a formal
induction on k, the essential property of the set U of vertices coloured 1
is that every vertex in G −U sends an edge to U: this ensures that
d+
G−U(v) < d+
G(v) for all v 2 G −U, so we can colour G −U with the
remaining k −1 colours by the induction hypothesis.
The following lemma generalizes these observations to list colour-
ing, and to orientations D of G that do not necessarily come from a
vertex enumeration but may contain some directed cycles. Let us call an
independent set U ✓V (D) a kernel of D if, for every vertex v 2 D −U,
kernel
there is an edge in D directed from v to a vertex in U. Note that kernels
of non-empty directed graphs are themselves non-empty.
Lemma 5.4.3. Let H be a graph and (Sv)v 2V (H) a family of lists. If H
has an orientation D with d+(v) < |Sv| for every v, and such that every
induced subgraph of D has a kernel, then H can be coloured from the
lists Sv.
Proof.
We apply induction on |H|.
For |H| = 0 we take the empty
colouring. For the induction step, let |H| > 0. Let ↵be a colour occur-
↵
ring in one of the lists Sv, and let D be an orientation of H as stated.
The vertices v with ↵2 Sv span a non-empty subgraph D0 in D; by
D0
assumption, D0 has a kernel U 6= ;.
U
Let us colour the vertices in U with ↵, and remove ↵from the lists
of all the other vertices of D0. Since each of those vertices sends an edge
to U, the modiﬁed lists S0
v for v 2 D −U again satisfy the condition

138
5. Colouring
d+(v) < |S0
v| in D −U. Since D −U is an orientation of H −U, we
can thus colour H −U from those lists by the induction hypothesis. As
none of these lists contains ↵, this extends our colouring U !{↵} to the
desired list colouring of H.
⇤
In our proof of the list colouring conjecture for bipartite graphs we
shall apply Lemma 5.4.3 only to colourings from lists of uniform length k.
However, note that keeping list lengths variable is essential for the proof
of the lemma itself: its simple induction could not be performed with
uniform list lengths.
Theorem 5.4.4. (Galvin 1995)
Every bipartite graph G satisﬁes ch0(G) = χ0(G).
Proof. Let G =: (X [ Y, E), where {X, Y } is a vertex bipartition of G.
(2.1.4)
We say that two edges of G meet in X if they share an end in X, and cor-
X, Y, E
respondingly for Y . Let χ0(G) =: k, and let c be a k-edge-colouring of G.
k, c
Clearly, ch0(G) > k; we prove that ch0(G) 6 k. Our plan is to use
Lemma 5.4.3 to show that the line graph H of G is k-choosable. To apply
H
the lemma, it suﬃces to ﬁnd an orientation D of H with d+(e) < k for
every vertex e of H, and such that every induced subgraph of D has a
kernel. To deﬁne D, consider adjacent e, e0 2 E, say with c(e) < c(e0).
D
If e and e0 meet in X, we orient the edge ee0 2 H from e0 towards e; if e
and e0 meet in Y , we orient it from e to e0 (Fig 5.4.3).
1
1
2
2
3
X
Y
G
Fig. 5.4.3. Orienting the line graph of G
Let us compute d+(e) for given e 2 E = V (D). If c(e) = i, say,
then every e0 2 N +(e) meeting e in X has its colour in {1, . . . , i −1},
and every e0 2 N +(e) meeting e in Y has its colour in {i + 1, . . . , k}.
As any two neighbours e0 of e meeting e either both in X or both in
Y are themselves adjacent and hence coloured di↵erently, this implies
d+(e) < k as desired.
It remains to show that every induced subgraph D0 of D has a kernel.
D0
This, however, is immediate by the stable marriage theorem (2.1.4) for G,
if we interpret the directions in D as expressing preference. Indeed, given
a vertex v 2 X [Y and edges e, e0 2 V (D0) at v, write e <v e0 if the edge

139
ee0 of H is directed from e to e0 in D. Then any stable matching in the
graph (X [ Y, V (D0)) for this set of preferences is a kernel in D0.
⇤
By Proposition 5.3.1, we now know the exact list-chromatic index
(5.3.1)
of bipartite graphs:
Corollary 5.4.5. Every bipartite graph G satisﬁes ch0(G) = ∆(G).
⇤
5.5 Perfect graphs
As discussed in Section 5.2, a high chromatic number may occur as a
purely global phenomenon: even when a graph has large girth, and thus
locally looks like a tree, its chromatic number may be arbitrarily high.
Since such ‘global dependence’ is obviously diﬃcult to deal with, one may
become interested in graphs where this phenomenon does not occur, i.e.
whose chromatic number is high only when there is a local reason for it.
Before we make this precise, let us deﬁne two new invariants for
a graph G.
The greatest integer r such that Kr ✓G is the clique
number !(G) of G. The greatest size of a set of independent vertices
!(G)
in G is the independence number ↵(G) of G. Clearly, ↵(G) = !(G) and
↵(G)
!(G) = ↵(G).
A graph is called perfect if every induced subgraph H ✓G has
perfect
chromatic number χ(H) = !(H), i.e. if the trivial lower bound of !(H)
colours always suﬃces to colour the vertices of H. Thus, while proving
an assertion of the form χ(G) > k may in general be diﬃcult, even
in principle, for a given graph G, it can always be done for a perfect
graph simply by exhibiting some Kk+1 subgraph as a ‘certiﬁcate’ for
non-colourability with k colours.
At ﬁrst glance, the structure of the class of perfect graphs appears
somewhat contrived: although it is closed under induced subgraphs (if
only by explicit deﬁnition), it is not closed under taking general sub-
graphs or supergraphs, let alone minors (examples?).
However, per-
fection is an important notion in graph theory: the fact that several
fundamental classes of graphs are perfect (as if by ﬂuke) may serve as a
superﬁcial indication of this.2
What graphs, then, are perfect? Bipartite graphs are, for instance.
Less trivially, the complements of bipartite graphs are perfect, too –
a fact equivalent to K¨onig’s duality theorem 2.1.1 (Exercise 41). The
2 The class of perfect graphs has duality properties with deep connections to
optimization and complexity theory, which are far from understood. Theorem 5.5.6
shows the tip of an iceberg here; for more, the reader is referred to Lov´asz’s survey
cited in the notes.
5.5 Perfect graphs
