[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 5. Colouring
현재 소단원: 5.5 Perfect graphs
직전 소단원: 「5.4 List colouring」
[본문]
139
ee0 of H is directed from e to e0 in D. Then any stable matching in the
graph (X [ Y, V (D0)) for this set of preferences is a kernel in D0.
⇤
By Proposition 5.3.1, we now know the exact list-chromatic index
(5.3.1)
of bipartite graphs:
Corollary 5.4.5. Every bipartite graph G satisﬁes ch0(G) = ∆(G).
⇤
5.5 Perfect graphs
As discussed in Section 5.2, a high chromatic number may occur as a
purely global phenomenon: even when a graph has large girth, and thus
locally looks like a tree, its chromatic number may be arbitrarily high.
Since such ‘global dependence’ is obviously diﬃcult to deal with, one may
become interested in graphs where this phenomenon does not occur, i.e.
whose chromatic number is high only when there is a local reason for it.
Before we make this precise, let us deﬁne two new invariants for
a graph G.
The greatest integer r such that Kr ✓G is the clique
number !(G) of G. The greatest size of a set of independent vertices
!(G)
in G is the independence number ↵(G) of G. Clearly, ↵(G) = !(G) and
↵(G)
!(G) = ↵(G).
A graph is called perfect if every induced subgraph H ✓G has
perfect
chromatic number χ(H) = !(H), i.e. if the trivial lower bound of !(H)
colours always suﬃces to colour the vertices of H. Thus, while proving
an assertion of the form χ(G) > k may in general be diﬃcult, even
in principle, for a given graph G, it can always be done for a perfect
graph simply by exhibiting some Kk+1 subgraph as a ‘certiﬁcate’ for
non-colourability with k colours.
At ﬁrst glance, the structure of the class of perfect graphs appears
somewhat contrived: although it is closed under induced subgraphs (if
only by explicit deﬁnition), it is not closed under taking general sub-
graphs or supergraphs, let alone minors (examples?).
However, per-
fection is an important notion in graph theory: the fact that several
fundamental classes of graphs are perfect (as if by ﬂuke) may serve as a
superﬁcial indication of this.2
What graphs, then, are perfect? Bipartite graphs are, for instance.
Less trivially, the complements of bipartite graphs are perfect, too –
a fact equivalent to K¨onig’s duality theorem 2.1.1 (Exercise 41). The
2 The class of perfect graphs has duality properties with deep connections to
optimization and complexity theory, which are far from understood. Theorem 5.5.6
shows the tip of an iceberg here; for more, the reader is referred to Lov´asz’s survey
cited in the notes.
5.5 Perfect graphs

140
5. Colouring
so-called comparability graphs are perfect, and so are the interval graphs
(see the exercises); both these turn up in numerous applications.
In order to study at least one such example in some detail, we prove
here that the chordal graphs are perfect: a graph is chordal (or trian-
chordal
gulated) if each of its cycles of length at least 4 has a chord, i.e. if it
contains no induced cycles other than triangles.
To show that chordal graphs are perfect, we shall ﬁrst characterize
their structure. If G is a graph with induced subgraphs G1, G2 and S,
such that G = G1 [ G2 and S = G1 \ G2, we say that G arises from G1
and G2 by pasting these graphs together along S.
pasting
Proposition 5.5.1. A graph is chordal if and only if it can be con-
[12.3.6]
structed recursively by pasting along complete subgraphs, starting from
complete graphs.
Proof. If G is obtained from two chordal graphs G1, G2 by pasting them
together along a complete subgraph, then G is clearly again chordal:
any induced cycle in G lies in either G1 or G2, and is hence a triangle
by assumption. Since complete graphs are chordal, this proves that all
graphs constructible as stated are chordal.
Conversely, let G be a chordal graph. We show by induction on |G|
that G can be constructed as described. This is trivial if G is complete.
We therefore assume that G is not complete, in particular that |G| > 1,
and that all smaller chordal graphs are constructible as stated.
Let
a, b 2 G be two non-adjacent vertices, and let X ✓V (G) r {a, b} be a
a, b, X
minimal a–b separator. Let C denote the component of G −X contain-
C
ing a, and put G1 := G[V (C) [ X] and G2 := G −C. Then G arises
G1, G2
from G1 and G2 by pasting these graphs together along S := G[X].
S
a
b
S
G1
G2
P1
P2
s
t
Fig. 5.5.1. If G1 and G2 are chordal, then so is G
Since G1 and G2 are both chordal (being induced subgraphs of G)
and hence constructible by induction, it suﬃces to show that S is com-
plete. Suppose, then, that s, t 2 S are non-adjacent. By the minimality
s, t
of X = V (S) as an a–b separator, both s and t have a neighbour in C.
Hence, there is an X-path from s to t in G1; we let P1 be a shortest such

141
path. Analogously, G2 contains a shortest X-path P2 from s to t. But
then P1 [P2 is a chordless cycle of length > 4 (Fig. 5.5.1), contradicting
our assumption that G is chordal.
⇤
Proposition 5.5.2. Every chordal graph is perfect.
Proof. Since complete graphs are perfect, it suﬃces by Proposition 5.5.1
to show that any graph G obtained from perfect graphs G1, G2 by past-
ing them together along a complete subgraph S is again perfect. So let
H ✓G be an induced subgraph; we show that χ(H) 6 !(H).
Let Hi := H \ Gi for i = 1, 2, and let T := H \ S. Then T is
again complete, and H arises from H1 and H2 by pasting along T. As
an induced subgraph of Gi, each Hi can be coloured with !(Hi) colours.
Since T is complete and hence coloured injectively, two such colourings,
one of H1 and one of H2, may be combined into a colouring of H with
max {!(H1), !(H2)} 6 !(H) colours – if necessary by permuting the
colours in one of the Hi.
⇤
By deﬁnition, every induced subgraph of a perfect graph is again
perfect. The property of perfection can therefore be characterized by
forbidden induced subgraphs: there exists a set H of imperfect graphs
such that any graph is perfect if and only if it has no induced subgraph
isomorphic to an element of H. (For example, we may choose as H the
set of all imperfect graphs with vertices in N.)
Naturally, one would like to keep H as small as possible. It is one of
the deepest results in graph theory that H need only contain two types of
graph: the odd cycles of length > 5 and their complements. (Neither of
these are perfect; cf. Theorem 5.5.4 below.) This fact, the famous strong
perfect graph conjecture of Berge (1963), was proved only 40 years later:
Theorem 5.5.3. (Chudnovsky, Robertson, Seymour & Thomas 2006)
strong
perfect
graph
theorem
A graph G is perfect if and only if neither G nor G contains an odd cycle
of length at least 5 as an induced subgraph.
In the context of perfect graphs, induced cycles of length at least 4 in G
are usually referred to as holes in G, while holes in G are antiholes of G.
hole
antihole
In this jargon, the strong perfect graph theorem says that a graph is
perfect if and only if it has neither odd holes nor odd antiholes.
The proof of the strong perfect graph theorem is long and techni-
cal, and it would not be too illuminating to attempt to sketch it. Its
overall design is not unlike our proof that chordal graphs are perfect:
it decomposes the graph under consideration into simpler pieces, which
are shown to be perfect ﬁrst, in ways that preserve perfection when the
pieces are put back together – much as the decomposition along complete
subgraphs did in the case of chordal graphs.
5.5 Perfect graphs

142
5. Colouring
To shed more light on the notion of perfection, we instead give
two direct proofs of its most important consequence: the perfect graph
theorem, formerly Berge’s weak perfect graph conjecture:
Theorem 5.5.4. (Lov´asz 1972)
perfect
graph
theorem
A graph is perfect if and only if its complement is perfect.
We give two proofs for Theorem 5.5.4. The ﬁrst is based on ideas from
Lov´asz’s original proof. The second is a magical linear algebra proof,
due to Gasparian (1996), of a slightly stronger theorem of Lov´asz’s.
The ﬁrst proof of Theorem 5.5.4 is based on a crucial lemma. Let
G be a graph and x 2 G a vertex, and let G0 be obtained from G by
adding a vertex x0 and joining it to x and all the neighbours of x. We say
that G0 is obtained from G by replicating the vertex x to the pair {x, x0}
replicating
a vertex
(Fig. 5.5.2).
X r { x }
x
0
G0
x
G
H
Fig. 5.5.2. Replicating the vertex x in the proof of Lemma 5.5.5
Lemma 5.5.5. (Replication Lemma)
Any graph obtained from a perfect graph by replicating a vertex is again
perfect.
Proof. We use induction on the order of the perfect graph considered.
Replicating the vertex of K1 yields K2, which is perfect. For the induc-
tion step, let G be a non-trivial perfect graph, and let G0 be obtained
from G by replicating a vertex x 2 G to a pair {x, x0}. For our proof
x, x0
that G0 is perfect it suﬃces to show χ(G0) 6 !(G0). Indeed, every proper
induced subgraph H0 of G0 is either isomorphic to an induced subgraph
H of G and hence perfect by assumption, or it is obtained from a proper
induced subgraph of G by replicating x and hence perfect by the induc-
tion hypothesis. Either way, it can be coloured with !(H0) colours.
Let !(G) =: ! ; then !(G0) 2 {!, ! + 1}. If !(G0) = ! + 1, then
!
χ(G0) 6 χ(G) + 1 = ! + 1 = !(G0)
and we are done. So let us assume that !(G0) = !. Then x lies in no
K! ✓G: together with x0, this would yield a K!+1 in G0. Let us colour
G with ! colours. Since every K! ✓G meets the colour class X of x but
X

5.5 Perfect graphs
143
not x itself, the graph H := G−(X r{x}) has clique number !(H) < !
H
(Fig. 5.5.2). Since G is perfect, we may thus colour H with ! −1 colours.
Now X is independent, so the set (X r {x}) [ {x0} = V (G0 −H) is also
independent. We can therefore extend our (! −1)-colouring of H to an
!-colouring of G0, showing that χ(G0) 6 ! = !(G0) as desired.
⇤
Interestingly, while replicating a vertex preserves perfection, it does
not preserve the property of χ = ! if this holds only for the graph itself:
we need that all induced subgraphs have this property too (Exercise 47).
Proof of Theorem 5.5.4. Given a perfect graph G, let us show that G is
perfect too. We prove the following statement ﬁrst:
Every induced subgraph H of G has a complete subgraph
K that meets all its independent vertex sets of size ↵(H).
(⇤)
For our proof of (⇤), let A be the set of all independent vertex sets
A
of size ↵(H) in H. Let A0 = { A0 | A 2 A } be a set of disjoint copies
A0
of the sets in A, one new set A0 for each A 2 A, and let U := S A0 be
their disjoint union. For every vertex v of H write Uv for the set of its
Uv
clones in U, one in each A0 with v 2 A.3 These sets Uv may be empty,
but every vertex of H0 lies in some Uv.
Deﬁne a graph H0 on U by making Uv complete for every v 2 H,
H0
and adding all Uu −Uv edges whenever uv is an edge of H. The sets
A0 2 A0 are independent in H0, because the A 2 A are independent in H.
And H0 contains no larger independent sets than these A0. Indeed, any
independent set in H0 meets each Uv in at most one vertex; the ver-
tices v whose Uv it meets are independent in H, so there are at most
↵(H) = |A0| such v; and H0 has no vertices outside the sets Uv. Since
the A0 are disjoint and all have the same size, the fact that H0 contains
no larger independent sets than these implies that it cannot be coloured
with fewer than |A0| colours. Thus, χ(H0) = |A0|.
Since H0 arises from an induced subgraph of H by vertex replication,
Lemma 5.5.5 implies that it is perfect. It thus has a complete subgraph
K0 of order χ(H0). As χ(H0) = |A0| and K0 has at most one vertex in
each A0, it meets every A0 2 A0.
Let K be the subgraph of H induced by the vertices v for which K0
meets Uv. This is a complete subgraph of H that meets every A 2 A,
because K0 meets every A0 2 A0. This completes the proof of (⇤).
Let us now show that G is perfect. Expressed in terms of G, we
have to show that we can cover the vertices of any induced subgraph H
of G by at most ↵(H) complete subgraphs K of H. These can be found
inductively by ↵(H) applications of (⇤), since ↵(H −K) < ↵(H) if
K ✓H satisﬁes (⇤).
⇤
3 This can be expressed formally by letting A0 := { (v, A) | v 2 A } for every A 2 A,
and Uv := { (v, A) | v 2 A 2 A } = { (v, A) 2 A0 | A 2 A } for every v 2 V (H).

144
5. Colouring
The proof of the perfect graph theorem ist best understood if we
start from the last paragraph: once we have shown (⇤), the proof that
G is perfect is easy.
The existence of a complete graph K as in (⇤) follows at once from
the perfection of H if the sets in A provide an optimal colouring of H: if
they cover its vertices and |A| 6 χ(H). The ﬁrst of these requirements,
however, is immaterial. We can just replace H with its subgraph induced
by those of its vertices that are covered by A : that subgraph, too, will
be perfect, and any K found in it will satisfy (⇤) also for the original H.
So assuming that A covers H, how can we prove that a colouring it
induces is optimal? This would be immediate if the A 2 A were disjoint:
since they all have the same size, any colouring with fewer colours would
need a larger colour class, which does not exist since the sets in A have
size ↵(H). The trick, now, is simply to make the sets in A disjoint, as is
done ﬁrst thing in the proof of (⇤). The obvious way to copy the structure
of H to the enlarged vertex set without creating any larger independent
sets, then, is to endow it with the edges as in the deﬁnition of H0 in the
proof. This, in turn, motivates the notion of vertex replication.
All we need to complete the proof now is that the expanded graph H0
is again perfect. This is Lemma 5.5.5.
Since the following characterization of perfection is symmetrical in
G and G, it clearly implies Theorem 5.5.4. As our proof of Theorem
5.5.6 will again be from ﬁrst principles, we thus obtain a second and
independent proof of the perfect graph theorem.
Theorem 5.5.6. (Lov´asz 1972)
A graph G is perfect if and only if
|H| 6 ↵(H) · !(H)
(⇤)
for all induced subgraphs H ✓G.
Proof.
Let us write V (G) =: {v1, . . . , vn}, and put ↵:= ↵(G) and
vi, n
! := !(G). The necessity of (⇤) is immediate: if G is perfect, then every
↵, !
induced subgraph H of G can be partitioned into at most !(H) colour
classes each containing at most ↵(H) vertices, and (⇤) follows.
To prove suﬃciency, we apply induction on n = |G|. Assume that
every induced subgraph H of G satisﬁes (⇤), and suppose that G is not
perfect. By the induction hypothesis, every proper induced subgraph
of G is perfect. Hence, every non-empty independent set U ✓V (G)
satisﬁes
χ(G −U) = !(G −U) = ! .
(1)
Indeed, while the ﬁrst equality is immediate from the perfection of G−U,
the second is easy: ‘6’ is obvious, while χ(G −U) < ! would imply
χ(G) 6 !, so G would be perfect contrary to our assumption.

5.5 Perfect graphs
145
Let us apply (1) to a singleton U = {u} and consider an !-colouring
of G −u. Let K be the vertex set of any K! in G. Clearly,
if u /2 K then K meets every colour class of G −u;
(2)
if u 2 K then K meets all but exactly one colour class of G −u.
(3)
Let A0 = {u1, . . . , u↵} be an independent set in G of size ↵.
A0
Let A1, . . . , A! be the colour classes of an !-colouring of G −u1, let
A!+1, . . . , A2! be the colour classes of an !-colouring of G −u2, and
so on; altogether, this gives us ↵! + 1 independent sets A0, A1, . . . , A↵!
Ai
in G. For each i = 0, . . . , ↵!, there exists by (1) a K! ✓G −Ai; we
denote its vertex set by Ki.
Ki
Note that if K is the vertex set of any K! in G, then
K \ Ai = ; for exactly one i 2 {0, . . . , ↵!}.
(4)
Indeed, if K \ A0 = ; then K \ Ai 6= ; for all i 6= 0, by deﬁnition of Ai
and (2). Similarly if K \ A0 6= ;, then |K \ A0| = 1, so K \ Ai = ; for
exactly one i 6= 0: apply (3) to the unique vertex u 2 K \ A0, and (2)
to all the other vertices u 2 A0.
Let A = (aij) be the real (↵! + 1) ⇥n matrix whose rows are the
A
incidence vectors of the sets Ai with V (G): where aij = 1 if vj 2 Ai, and
aij = 0 otherwise. Similarly, let B denote the real n ⇥(↵! + 1) matrix
B
whose columns are the incidence vectors of the sets Kj with V (G). Now
while |Ai \ Ki| = 0 for all i by the choice of Ki, we have Ai \ Kj 6= ;
and hence |Ai \ Kj| = 1 whenever i 6= j, by (4). Thus,
J := AB
is the (↵! + 1) ⇥(↵! + 1) matrix with zero entries in the main diagonal
and all other entries 1.
It is easy to see that J is non-singular, and hence has rank ↵! + 1.
But A, which has n columns, cannot have lower rank than J. Hence
n > ↵! + 1, which contradicts (⇤) for H := G.
⇤

146
5. Colouring
5.6 χ-bounded graph properties
Our motivation for considering perfect graphs in the last section was
that high chromaticity is easier to understand for these graphs than in
general: if a perfect graph has chromatic number at least r, it has a local
reason for this in the form of a Kr subgraph. It turned out that perfec-
tion has structural implications far beyond this. We may ask, therefore,
whether graph properties deﬁned by a slightly weaker condition might
still imply some interesting structure for the graphs that have them.
Consider any graph property G which, like perfection, is closed un-
der taking induced subgraphs: a class that contains all induced sub-
graphs of its elements. We call G χ-bounded if there exists a function
χ-bounded
f: N ! N, called a χ-bounding function, such that χ(G) 6 f(r) for all
χ-bounding
graphs G 2 G of clique number !(G) 6 r, for all r 2 N. In particular,
then, χ(G) 6 f(!(G)); but note that for individual functions f this
is a weaker condition. Perfection, for example, is χ-bounded with χ-
bounding function f(r) = r.
Qualitatively, graphs in a χ-bounded class G have complete sub-
graphs as large as desired as soon as their chromatic number is big
enough: that is the idea behind the notion of χ-boundedness. Quanti-
tatively, if f is a χ-bounding function for G, then any G
2 G with
χ(G) > f(r) contains a Kr+1, for every r 2 N.
Not all graph classes that are closed under taking induced subgraphs
are χ-bounded: the triangle-free graphs, for example, are not, by Erd˝os’s
Theorem 5.2.5. So which classes are?
Every graph property G that is closed under induced subgraphs is
characterized by the class H of graphs that are not in G and are minimal
with this property under the induced-subgraph relation: an arbitrary
graph G lies in G if and only if it has no induced subgraph in H. One
way to search for χ-bounded graph properties, therefore, is to examine
those characterized in this way by some particularly simple classes H.
The strong perfect graph theorem implies that G is χ-bounded when
H consists of all odd holes and antiholes. But since χ-boundedness is
weaker than perfection, we can make H smaller, thereby making G larger:
Theorem 5.6.1. (Scott & Seymour 2016)
The graphs with no odd hole are χ-bounded.
Theorem 5.6.1 is one of the earliest results of its kind proved in the
wake of the strong perfect graph theorem. It has since been strength-
ened in various ways, see the notes. The notion of χ-boundedness itself
is much older. It was introduced by Gy´arf´as in 1975, who later proved
the following pretty result:
Proposition 5.6.2. If P is any ﬁxed path, then the graphs not con-
taining P as an induced subgraph are χ-bounded.
