[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 5. Colouring
현재 소단원: 5.6 χ-bounded graph properties
직전 소단원: 「5.5 Perfect graphs」
[본문]
146
5. Colouring
5.6 χ-bounded graph properties
Our motivation for considering perfect graphs in the last section was
that high chromaticity is easier to understand for these graphs than in
general: if a perfect graph has chromatic number at least r, it has a local
reason for this in the form of a Kr subgraph. It turned out that perfec-
tion has structural implications far beyond this. We may ask, therefore,
whether graph properties deﬁned by a slightly weaker condition might
still imply some interesting structure for the graphs that have them.
Consider any graph property G which, like perfection, is closed un-
der taking induced subgraphs: a class that contains all induced sub-
graphs of its elements. We call G χ-bounded if there exists a function
χ-bounded
f: N ! N, called a χ-bounding function, such that χ(G) 6 f(r) for all
χ-bounding
graphs G 2 G of clique number !(G) 6 r, for all r 2 N. In particular,
then, χ(G) 6 f(!(G)); but note that for individual functions f this
is a weaker condition. Perfection, for example, is χ-bounded with χ-
bounding function f(r) = r.
Qualitatively, graphs in a χ-bounded class G have complete sub-
graphs as large as desired as soon as their chromatic number is big
enough: that is the idea behind the notion of χ-boundedness. Quanti-
tatively, if f is a χ-bounding function for G, then any G
2 G with
χ(G) > f(r) contains a Kr+1, for every r 2 N.
Not all graph classes that are closed under taking induced subgraphs
are χ-bounded: the triangle-free graphs, for example, are not, by Erd˝os’s
Theorem 5.2.5. So which classes are?
Every graph property G that is closed under induced subgraphs is
characterized by the class H of graphs that are not in G and are minimal
with this property under the induced-subgraph relation: an arbitrary
graph G lies in G if and only if it has no induced subgraph in H. One
way to search for χ-bounded graph properties, therefore, is to examine
those characterized in this way by some particularly simple classes H.
The strong perfect graph theorem implies that G is χ-bounded when
H consists of all odd holes and antiholes. But since χ-boundedness is
weaker than perfection, we can make H smaller, thereby making G larger:
Theorem 5.6.1. (Scott & Seymour 2016)
The graphs with no odd hole are χ-bounded.
Theorem 5.6.1 is one of the earliest results of its kind proved in the
wake of the strong perfect graph theorem. It has since been strength-
ened in various ways, see the notes. The notion of χ-boundedness itself
is much older. It was introduced by Gy´arf´as in 1975, who later proved
the following pretty result:
Proposition 5.6.2. If P is any ﬁxed path, then the graphs not con-
taining P as an induced subgraph are χ-bounded.

5.6 χ-bounded graph properties
147
We shall derive Proposition 5.6.2 from a lemma that weakens the
assumption of not containing the given path to better support induction:
Lemma 5.6.3. There is a function g: N2 ! N such that χ(G) 6 g(c, k)
for every connected graph G satisfying
(i) χ(G[N(v)]) 6 c for every vertex v 2 G;
(ii) G has a vertex v at which no induced path of length k starts.
Proof. We prove by induction on k that the function g deﬁned recursively
by g(c, 1) := 1 and g(c, k) := g(c, k −1) + c + 1, for all c 2 N and k > 1,
is as desired. The induction starts with k = 1, in which case G = K1
by (ii).
For the induction step pick v 2 G as in (ii). Since G is connected,
every component C of G −N(v) −v has a neighbour u in N(v). By
induction, χ(G[V (C) [ {u}]) 6 g(c, k −1), so also χ(C) 6 g(c, k −1).
Combining such colourings of all these C with a (c+1)-colouring of v and
its neighbours, which exists by (i), yields a g(c, k)-colouring of G.
⇤
Proof of Proposition 5.6.2. Fix any k 2 N. Let f: N ! N be deﬁned
recursively by f(1) := 1 and f(r) := g(f(r −1), k) for r > 1, where
g is the function from Lemma 5.6.3. We prove by induction on r that
every graph G that contains no path of length k induced and is such
that !(G) 6 r satisﬁes χ(G) 6 f(r).
The induction starts at r = 1, in which case G consists of isolated
vertices. For the induction step let Gv := G[N(v)] for vertices v of G.
As !(G) 6 r we have !(Gv) 6 r −1, and hence χ(Gv) 6 f(r −1), for
every v. By Lemma 5.6.3 with c = f(r −1) this yields χ(G) 6 f(r).
⇤
Proposition 5.6.2 is a special case of a more sweeping conjecture.
As we noted earlier for triangles, excluding a graph H will not deﬁne
a χ-bounded graph property if H contains a cycle: by Theorem 5.2.5
there are graphs of arbitrarily large chromatic number and girth greater
than g(H), which thus do not contain H but have clique number 2.
The following conjecture claims that this is the only obstruction to
χ-boundedness: that excluding any graph that does not contain a cycle
will deﬁne a χ-bounded class.
Conjecture. (Gy´arf´as 1975; Sumner 1981)
If F is any ﬁxed forest, then the graphs not containing F as an induced
subgraph are χ-bounded.

148
5. Colouring
Exercises
1.−Show that the four colour theorem does indeed solve the map colouring
problem stated in the ﬁrst sentence of the chapter. Conversely, does
the 4-colourability of every map imply the four colour theorem?
2.−Show that, for the map colouring problem above, it suﬃces to con-
sider maps such that no point lies on the boundary of more than three
countries. How does this a↵ect the proof of the four colour theorem?
3.
Try to turn the proof of the ﬁve colour theorem into one of the four
colour theorem, as follows. Deﬁning v and H as before, assume induc-
tively that H has a 4-colouring; then proceed as before. Where does
the proof fail?
4.
Calculate the chromatic number of a graph in terms of the chromatic
numbers of its blocks.
5.−Let G be a graph, and let k 2 N.
(i) Show that G has chromatic number at most k if and only if there
exists a homomorphism from G to Kk.
(ii) Show that G is bipartite if and only if there exists a homomor-
phism from G to K2 or to an even cycle.
(iii) Are there homomorphisms from C17 to C7, from C7 to C17,
from C16 to C7, and from C17 to C6?
6.
Show that graphs of large girth and without a given minor are ‘nearly
bipartite’ in the following sense. Let H be a ﬁxed graph and C a ﬁxed
odd cycle. Use Theorem 7.2.6 to show that if G is a graph of suﬃciently
large girth (depending only on H and C) that does not contain H as a
minor, then there is a homomorphism from G to C.
7.
For every n > 1, ﬁnd a bipartite graph on 2n vertices, ordered in such
a way that the greedy algorithm uses n rather than 2 colours.
8.
Consider the following approach to vertex colouring. First, ﬁnd a max-
imal independent set of vertices and colour these with colour 1; then
ﬁnd a maximal independent set of vertices in the remaining graph and
colour those 2, and so on. Compare this algorithm with the greedy
algorithm: which is better?
9.
Show that the bound of Proposition 5.2.2 is always at least as sharp as
that of Proposition 5.2.1.
A k-chromatic graph G is called critically k-chromatic, or just critical, if
χ(G −v) < k for every v 2 V (G).
10.
Determine the critical 3-chromatic graphs.
11.+ Show that every critical k-chromatic graph is (k −1) - edge-connected.
12.
Formalize and prove the following statement: assuming large average
degree drives the colouring number up but not the chromatic number.
