[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 5. Colouring
현재 소단원: 5.ex Exercises
직전 소단원: 「5.6 χ-bounded graph properties」
[연습문제]
148
5. Colouring
Exercises
1.−Show that the four colour theorem does indeed solve the map colouring
problem stated in the ﬁrst sentence of the chapter. Conversely, does
the 4-colourability of every map imply the four colour theorem?
2.−Show that, for the map colouring problem above, it suﬃces to con-
sider maps such that no point lies on the boundary of more than three
countries. How does this a↵ect the proof of the four colour theorem?
3.
Try to turn the proof of the ﬁve colour theorem into one of the four
colour theorem, as follows. Deﬁning v and H as before, assume induc-
tively that H has a 4-colouring; then proceed as before. Where does
the proof fail?
4.
Calculate the chromatic number of a graph in terms of the chromatic
numbers of its blocks.
5.−Let G be a graph, and let k 2 N.
(i) Show that G has chromatic number at most k if and only if there
exists a homomorphism from G to Kk.
(ii) Show that G is bipartite if and only if there exists a homomor-
phism from G to K2 or to an even cycle.
(iii) Are there homomorphisms from C17 to C7, from C7 to C17,
from C16 to C7, and from C17 to C6?
6.
Show that graphs of large girth and without a given minor are ‘nearly
bipartite’ in the following sense. Let H be a ﬁxed graph and C a ﬁxed
odd cycle. Use Theorem 7.2.6 to show that if G is a graph of suﬃciently
large girth (depending only on H and C) that does not contain H as a
minor, then there is a homomorphism from G to C.
7.
For every n > 1, ﬁnd a bipartite graph on 2n vertices, ordered in such
a way that the greedy algorithm uses n rather than 2 colours.
8.
Consider the following approach to vertex colouring. First, ﬁnd a max-
imal independent set of vertices and colour these with colour 1; then
ﬁnd a maximal independent set of vertices in the remaining graph and
colour those 2, and so on. Compare this algorithm with the greedy
algorithm: which is better?
9.
Show that the bound of Proposition 5.2.2 is always at least as sharp as
that of Proposition 5.2.1.
A k-chromatic graph G is called critically k-chromatic, or just critical, if
χ(G −v) < k for every v 2 V (G).
10.
Determine the critical 3-chromatic graphs.
11.+ Show that every critical k-chromatic graph is (k −1) - edge-connected.
12.
Formalize and prove the following statement: assuming large average
degree drives the colouring number up but not the chromatic number.

Exercises
149
13.
Write col0(G) for the least number of colours used by the greedy algo-
rithm for a suitable vertex ordering of a graph G. Does every G satisfy
col0(G) = col(G) or col0(G) = χ(G)?
14.
Find a function f such that every graph of arboricity at least f(k) has
colouring number at least k, and a function g such that every graph of
colouring number at least g(k) has arboricity at least k, for all k 2 N.
15.
Given k
2 N, ﬁnd a constant ck > 0 such that every large enough
graph G with ↵(G) 6 k contains a cycle of length at least ck |G|.
16.−Find a graph G for which Brooks’s theorem yields a signiﬁcantly weaker
bound on χ(G) than Proposition 5.2.2.
17.+ Show that, in order to prove Brooks’s theorem for a graph G = (V, E),
we may assume that (G) > 2 and δ(G) > 3. Then prove the theorem
under these assumptions, showing ﬁrst the following two lemmas.
(i) Let v1, . . . , vn be an enumeration of V . If every vi (i < n) has
a neighbour vj with j > i, and if v1vn, v2vn 2 E but v1v2 /
2 E,
then the greedy algorithm uses at most ∆(G) colours.
(ii) If G is not complete, it has a vertex vn with non-adjacent neigh-
bours v1, v2 that do not separate G.
18.+ Show that the following statements are equivalent for a graph G:
(i) χ(G) 6 k;
(ii) G has an orientation without directed paths of length k;
(iii) G has an acyclic such orientation (one without directed cycles).
19.
Given a graph G and k 2 N, let PG(k) denote the number of vertex
colourings V (G) ! {1, . . . , k}. Show that PG is a polynomial in k of
degree n := |G|, in which the coeﬃcient of kn is 1 and the coeﬃcient
of kn−1 is −kGk. (PG is called the chromatic polynomial of G.)
(Hint. Apply induction on kGk.)
20.+ Determine the class of all graphs G for which PG(k) = k (k −1)n−1. (As
in the previous exercise, let n := |G|, and let PG denote the chromatic
polynomial of G.)
21.
Show that for every k 2 N there is a unique ✓-minimal ‘Kuratowski
class’ Xk of k-chromatic graphs such that every k-chromatic graph has
a subgraph in Xk, but that for k > 3 this class Xk is never ﬁnite.
22.
For every k 2 N, construct a triangle-free k-chromatic graph. Can you
even make them C4-free?
23.
Consider an inﬁnite matrix whose rows and columns are both indexed
by N r {0}. For all i, j 2 N r {0} join the element vij in row i and
column j to every element of column i + j. Prove that the resulting
graph contains no triangle. What is its chromatic number?

150
5. Colouring
24.
In the deﬁnition of ‘k-constructible’, replace axioms (ii) and (iii) by
(ii)0 Every supergraph of a k-constructible graph is k-constructible.
(iii)0 If x, y1, y2 are distinct vertices of a graph G and y1y2 2 E(G),
and if both G + xy1 and G + xy2 are k-constructible, then G is
k-constructible.
Show that a graph is k-constructible with respect to this new deﬁnition
if and only if its chromatic number is at least k.
25.−An n ⇥n - matrix with entries from {1, . . . , n} is called a Latin square
if every element of {1, . . . , n} appears exactly once in each column and
exactly once in each row. Recast the problem of constructing Latin
squares as a colouring problem.
26.
Without using Proposition 5.3.1, show that χ0(G) = k for every k-
regular bipartite graph G.
27.
Prove Proposition 5.3.1 from the statement of the previous exercise.
28.+ A forest is called linear if all its components are paths. Show that every
cubic graph has an edge-decomposition into two linear forests.
29.−Without using Theorem 5.4.2, show that every plane graph is 6-list-
colourable.
30.
For every integer k, ﬁnd a 2-chromatic graph whose choice number is
at least k.
31.−Find a general upper bound for ch0(G) in terms of χ0(G).
32.
Compare the choice number of a graph with its colouring number:
which is greater? Can you prove the analogue of Theorem 5.4.1 for
the colouring number (directly, without using any major theorem)?
33.+ Prove that the choice number of Kr
2 is r.
34.
The total chromatic number χ00(G) of a graph G = (V, E) is the least
number of colours needed to colour the vertices and edges of G simulta-
neously so that any adjacent or incident elements of V [E are coloured
di↵erently. The total colouring conjecture says that χ00(G) 6 ∆(G)+2.
Bound the total chromatic number from above in terms of the list-
chromatic index, and use this bound to deduce a weakening of the
total colouring conjecture from the list colouring conjecture.
35.−Does every oriented graph have a kernel? If not, does every graph have
an orientation in which every induced subgraph has a kernel? If not,
does every graph have an orientation that has a kernel?
36.+ Prove that every directed graph without odd directed cycles has a kernel.
37.
Show that every bipartite planar graph is 3-list-colourable.
(Hint. Apply the previous exercise and Lemma 5.4.3.)
38.−Show that perfection is closed neither under edge deletion nor under
edge contraction.

Exercises
151
39.−Deduce Theorem 5.5.6 from the strong perfect graph theorem.
40.
Let H1 and H2 be two sets of imperfect graphs, each minimal with
the property that a graph is perfect if and only if it has no induced
subgraph in Hi (i = 1, 2). Do H1 and H2 contain the same graphs, up
to isomorphism?
41.
Use K¨onig’s Theorem 2.1.1 to show that the complement of any bipar-
tite graph is perfect.
42.
Using the results of this chapter, ﬁnd a one-line proof of the following
theorem of K¨onig, the dual of Theorem 2.1.1: in any bipartite graph
without isolated vertices, the minimum number of edges meeting all
vertices equals the maximum number of independent vertices.
43.
A graph is called a comparability graph if there exists a partial ordering
of its vertex set such that two vertices are adjacent if and only if they
are comparable. Show that every comparability graph is perfect.
44.
A graph G is called an interval graph if there exists a set { Iv | v 2 V (G) }
of real intervals such that Iu \ Iv 6= ; if and only if uv 2 E(G).
(i) Show that every interval graph is chordal.
(ii) Show that the complement of any interval graph is a compara-
bility graph.
(Conversely, a chordal graph is an interval graph if its complement is a
comparability graph; this is a theorem of Gilmore and Ho↵man (1964).)
45.
Show that χ(H) 2 {!(H) , !(H) + 1} for every line graph H.
46.+ Characterize the graphs whose line graphs are perfect.
47.
Let G0 be obtained from a graph G by replicating a vertex. If G satisﬁes
χ = !, does G0 too?
48.
Show that a graph G is perfect if and only if every non-empty induced
subgraph H of G contains an independent set A ✓V (H) such that
!(H −A) < !(H).
49.+ Consider the graphs G for which every induced subgraph H has the
property that every maximum-size complete subgraph of H meets every
maximum-size independent vertex set in H.
(i) Show that these graphs G are perfect.
(ii) Show that these graphs G are precisely the graphs not containing
an induced copy of P 3.
50.+ Show that in every perfect graph G one can ﬁnd a set A of independent
vertex sets and a set K of vertex sets of complete subgraphs such that
S
A = V (G) = S
K and every set in A meets every set in K.
(Hint. Lemma 5.5.5.)
51.+ Let G be a perfect graph. As in the proof of Theorem 5.5.4, replace
every vertex v of G with a perfect graph Gv (not necessarily complete),
adding all Gu–Gv edges whenever uv is an edge of G. Show that the
resulting graph G0 is again perfect.

152
5. Colouring
52.
Show that χ(G) > max { !(G), d|G|/↵(Ge)} for all graphs G.
(i)−Find an example of G where this inequality is strict.
(ii)+ Prove that all graphs G obtained from cycles by repeated vertex
replication satisfy it with equality.
53.−Discuss why χ-boundedness is deﬁned only for graph properties that
are closed under induced subgraphs. Support your arguments by the
construction of a class that satisﬁes the deﬁnition of χ-boundedness but
is not closed under induced subgraphs, so that the graphs in this class
are very similar to the triangle-free graphs.
54.−Reduce the Gy´arf´as-Sumner conjecture to trees: prove that if not con-
taining any ﬁxed tree as an induced subgraph is a χ-bounded property
then so is that of not containing any ﬁxed forest.
Notes
The authoritative reference work on all questions of graph colouring is T.R.
Jensen & B. Toft, Graph Coloring Problems, Wiley 1995.
Starting with a
brief survey of the most important results and areas of research in the ﬁeld,
this monograph gives a detailed account of over 200 open colouring problems,
complete with extensive background surveys and references. Most of the re-
marks below are discussed comprehensively in this book, and all the references
for this chapter can be found there. A book speciﬁcally on edge colouring
is L.M. Favrholdt, D. Scheide, M. Stiebitz & B. Toft, Graph Edge Coloring:
Vizing’s Theorem and Goldberg’s Conjecture, Wiley 2012.
The four colour problem, whether every map can be coloured with four
colours so that adjacent countries are shown in di↵erent colours, was raised by
a certain Francis Guthrie in 1852. He put the question to his brother Frederick,
who was then a mathematics undergraduate in Cambridge. The problem was
ﬁrst brought to the attention of a wider public when Cayley presented it to
the London Mathematical Society in 1878. A year later, Kempe published an
incorrect proof, which was in 1890 modiﬁed by Heawood into our ﬁrst proof
of the ﬁve colour theorem. In 1880, Tait announced ‘further proofs’ of the
four colour conjecture, which never materialized; see the notes for Chapter 10.
Our second proof of the ﬁve colour theorem dates back at least to 1972, when
Woodall used it in his ﬁrst graph theory course.
The ﬁrst widely accepted proof of the four colour theorem was published
by Appel and Haken in 1977. The proof builds on ideas that can be traced back
as far as Kempe’s paper, and were developed largely by Birkho↵and Heesch.
Very roughly, the proof sets out ﬁrst to show that every plane triangulation
must contain at least one of 1482 certain ‘unavoidable conﬁgurations’. In a
second step, a computer is used to show that each of those conﬁgurations is
‘reducible’, i.e., that any plane triangulation containing such a conﬁguration
can be 4-coloured by piecing together 4-colourings of smaller plane triangula-
tions. Taken together, these two steps amount to an inductive proof that all
plane triangulations, and hence all planar graphs, can be 4-coloured.
Appel & Haken’s proof has not been immune to criticism, not only be-
cause of their use of a computer. The authors responded with a 741 page long
