[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 7. Extremal Graph Theory
현재 소단원: 7.1 Subgraphs
직전 소단원: 「6.ex Exercises」
[본문]
7
Extremal
Graph Theory
In this chapter we study how global parameters of a graph, such as its
edge density or chromatic number, can inﬂuence its local substructures.
How many edges, for instance, do we have to give a graph on n vertices
to be sure that, no matter how these edges are arranged, the graph will
contain a Kr subgraph for some given r? Or at least a Kr minor? Will
some suﬃciently high average degree or chromatic number ensure that
one of these substructures occurs?
Questions of this type are among the most natural ones in graph
theory, and there is a host of deep and interesting results. Collectively,
these are known as extremal graph theory.
Extremal graph problems in this sense fall neatly into two categories,
as follows. If we are looking for ways to ensure by global assumptions
that a graph G contains some given graph H as a minor (or topolo-
gical minor), it will suﬃce to raise kGk above the value of some linear
function of |G|, i.e., to make "(G) large enough. The precise value of "
needed to force a desired minor or topological minor will be our topic
in Section 7.2. Graphs whose number of edges is about1 linear in their
number of vertices are called sparse, so Section 7.2 is devoted to ‘sparse
sparse
extremal graph theory’.
A particularly interesting way to force an H minor is to assume
that χ(G) is large.
Recall that if χ(G) > k + 1, say, then G has a
subgraph G0 with 2"(G0) > δ(G0) > k (Lemma 5.2.3). The question here
is whether the e↵ect of large χ is limited to this indirect inﬂuence via ",
or whether an assumption of χ > k + 1 can force bigger minors than
1 Formally, the notions of sparse and dense (below) make sense only for classes
of graphs whose order tends to inﬁnity, not for individual graphs.
179
R. Diestel, Graph Theory, Graduate Texts in Mathematics 173,  
© Reinhard Diestel, under licence (exclusive for the print edition) 2025
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-70107-2_7

180
7. Extremal Graph Theory
the assumption of 2" > k can. Hadwiger’s conjecture, which we meet
in Section 7.3, asserts that χ has this quality. The conjecture can be
viewed as a generalization of the four colour theorem, and is regarded
by many as the most challenging open problem in graph theory.
On the other hand, if we ask what global assumptions might imply
the existence of some given graph H as a subgraph, it will not help to
raise invariants such as " or χ, let alone any of the other invariants dis-
cussed in Chapter 1. For as soon as H contains a cycle, there are graphs
of arbitrarily large chromatic number not containing H as a subgraph
(Theorem 5.2.5). In fact, unless H is bipartite, any function f such that
f(n) edges on n vertices force an H subgraph must grow quadratically
with n (why?).
Graphs with a number of edges about quadratic in their number of
dense
vertices are usually called dense; the number kGk
8$|G|
2
%
, the proportion
of its potential edges that G actually has, is the edge density of G. The
edge
density
question of exactly which edge density is needed to force a given subgraph
is the archetypal extremal graph problem, and it is our ﬁrst topic in this
chapter (Section 7.1). Rather than attempting to survey the wide ﬁeld of
‘dense extremal graph theory’, however, we shall concentrate on its two
most important results: we ﬁrst prove Tur´an’s classical extremal graph
theorem for H = Kr – a result that has served as a model for countless
similar theorems for other graphs H – and then state the fundamental
Erd˝os-Stone theorem, which gives precise asymptotic information for all
H at once.
Although the Erd˝os-Stone theorem can be proved by elementary
means, we shall use the opportunity of its proof to portray a powerful
modern proof technique that has transformed much of extremal graph
theory in recent years: Szemer´edi’s regularity lemma. This lemma is
presented and proved in Section 7.4. In Section 7.5 we outline a general
method for applying it, and illustrate this by our proof of the Erd˝os-Stone
theorem. Another application will be given in Chapter 9.2. Sections 7.6–
7.7 indicate some more advanced tools for applying the regularity lemma.
7.1 Subgraphs
Let H be a graph and n > |H|. How many edges will suﬃce to force an
H subgraph in any graph on n vertices, no matter how these edges are
arranged? Or, to rephrase the problem: which is the greatest possible
number of edges that a graph on n vertices can have without containing
a copy of H as a subgraph? What will such a graph look like? Will it
be unique?
A graph G 6◆H on n vertices with the largest possible number of
edges is called extremal for n and H; its number of edges is denoted by
extremal

7.1 Subgraphs
181
ex(n, H). Clearly, any graph G that is extremal for some n and H will
ex(n, H)
also be edge-maximal with H 6✓G. Conversely, though, edge-maximality
does not imply extremality: G may well be edge-maximal with H 6✓G
while having fewer than ex(n, H) edges (Fig. 7.1.1).
Fig. 7.1.1. Two graphs that are edge-maximal with P 3 6✓G; is
the right one extremal?
As a case in point, we consider our problem for H = Kr (with r > 1).
A moment’s thought suggests some obvious candidates for extremality
here: all complete (r −1)-partite graphs are edge-maximal without con-
taining Kr. But which among these have the greatest number of edges?
Clearly those whose partition sets are as equal as possible, i.e. di↵er in
size by at most 1: if V1, V2 are two partition sets with |V1|−|V2| > 2, we
may increase the number of edges in our complete (r −1)-partite graph
by moving a vertex from V1 to V2.
The unique complete (r −1)-partite graphs on n > r −1 vertices
whose partition sets di↵er in size by at most 1 are called Tur´an graphs;
we denote them by T r−1(n) and their number of edges by tr−1(n)
T r−1(n)
(Fig. 7.1.2).
For n < r −1 we shall formally continue to use these
tr−1(n)
deﬁnitions, with the proviso that – contrary to our usual terminology –
the partition sets may now be empty; then, clearly, T r−1(n) = Kn for
all n 6 r −1.
Fig. 7.1.2. The Tur´an graph T 3(8)
The following theorem tells us that T r−1(n) is indeed extremal for
n and Kr, and as such unique; in particular, ex(n, Kr) = tr−1(n).
Theorem 7.1.1. (Tur´an 1941)
[7.1.2]
[9.2.2]
For all integers r, n with r > 1, every graph G 6◆Kr with n vertices and
ex(n, Kr) edges is a T r−1(n).

182
7. Extremal Graph Theory
We give two proofs: one using induction, the other by a short and direct
local argument. While that argument in the second proof is perhaps
clever, the ﬁrst proof is particularly natural and o↵ers more insight.
First proof.
We apply induction on n.
For n 6 r −1 we have
G = Kn = T r−1(n) as claimed. For the induction step, let now n > r.
Since G is edge-maximal without a Kr subgraph, it has a subgraph
K = Kr−1, with vertices x1, . . . , xr−1 say. From Kr 6✓G alone we have
K
kG −Kk 6 ex(n −r + 1, Kr)
(1)
and
Every vertex in G −K sends at most r −2 edges to K.
(2)
For i = 1, . . . , r −1 let Vi := { v 2 V (G) | vxi /2 E(G) } (Fig. 7.1.3).
V1, . . . , Vr−1
xi
Vi
V1
Vr−1
G
K
K = Kr−1
Fig. 7.1.3. Are the sets V1, . . . , Vr−1 covering G −K disjoint?
Are they each independent?
Let G0 be obtained from K and an (r −1)-partite Tur´an graph
on V (G −K) by joining its ith partition class completely to K −{xi}
for each i. This G0 contains no Kr and satisﬁes both (1) and (2) with
equality, in the case of (1) by the induction hypothesis. Hence so does G,
because G cannot have fewer edges than G0.
Equality in (1) means, by the induction hypothesis, that G −K is
indeed an (r −1)-partite Tur´an graph. And its partition classes must be
the sets Vi r{xi}, since equality in (2) implies with G 6◆Kr that every Vi
is independent, and (r −1)-partite Tur´an graphs cannot be covered by
r −1 sets of independent vertices other than their partition classes. In
particular, these classes di↵er in size by at most 1. Hence G is a Tur´an
graph, too: with classes V1, . . . , Vr−1.
⇤

7.1 Subgraphs
183
In our second proof of Tur´an’s theorem we shall use an operation
called vertex duplication. By duplicating a vertex v 2 G we mean adding
vertex
duplication
to G a new vertex v0 and joining it to exactly the neighbours of v (but
not to v itself).
Second proof. We have already seen that among the complete k-partite
graphs on n vertices the Tur´an graphs T k(n) have the most edges, and
their degrees show that T r−1(n) has more edges than any T k(n) with
k < r −1. So it suﬃces to show that G is complete multipartite.
If not, then non-adjacency is not an equivalence relation on V (G),
and so there are vertices y1, x, y2 such that y1x, xy2
/2 E(G) but
y1y2 2 E(G). If d(y1) > d(x), then deleting x and duplicating y1 yields
another Kr-free graph with more edges than G, contradicting the choice
of G. So d(y1) 6 d(x), and similarly d(y2) 6 d(x). But then deleting
both y1 and y2 and duplicating x twice yields a Kr-free graph with more
edges than G, again contradicting the choice of G.
⇤
The Tur´an graphs T r−1(n) are dense: in order of magnitude, they
have about n2 edges. More exactly, for every n and r we have
tr−1(n) 6 1
2n2 r −2
r −1 ,
with equality whenever r −1 divides n (Exercise 7). It is therefore re-
markable that just ✏n2 more edges (for any ﬁxed ✏> 0 and n large) give
us not only a Kr subgraph (as does Tur´an’s theorem) but a Kr
s for any
given integer s – a graph itself teeming with Kr subgraphs:
Theorem 7.1.2. (Erd˝os & Stone 1946)
For all integers r > 2 and s > 1, and every ✏> 0, there exists an integer
n0 such that every graph with n > n0 vertices and at least
tr−1(n) + ✏n2
edges contains Kr
s as a subgraph.
A proof of the Erd˝os-Stone theorem will be given in Section 7.5, as
an illustration of how the regularity lemma may be applied. But the
theorem can also be proved directly; see the notes for references.
The Erd˝os-Stone theorem is interesting not only in its own right: it
also has a most interesting corollary. In fact, it was this entirely unex-
pected corollary that established the theorem as a kind of meta-theorem
for the extremal theory of dense graphs, and thus made it famous.
Given a graph H and an integer n, consider the number hn :=
ex(n, H)/
$n
2
%
: the maximum edge density that an n-vertex graph can

184
7. Extremal Graph Theory
have without containing a copy of H.
Could it be that this critical
density is essentially just a function of H, that hn converges as n ! 1?
Theorem 7.1.2 implies this, and more: the limit of hn is determined by a
very simple function of a natural invariant of H – its chromatic number!
Corollary 7.1.3. For every graph H with at least one edge,
lim
n!1 ex(n, H)
✓n
2
◆−1
= χ(H) −2
χ(H) −1 .
For the proof of Corollary 7.1.3 we need as a lemma that tr−1(n)
never deviates much from the value it takes when r −1 divides n (see
above), and that tr−1(n)/
$n
2
%
converges accordingly. The proof of the
lemma is left as an easy exercise with hint (Exercise 8).
Lemma 7.1.4.
[7.1.2]
lim
n!1 tr−1(n)
✓n
2
◆−1
= r −2
r −1 .
⇤
Proof of Corollary 7.1.3. Let r := χ(H). Since H cannot be coloured
r
with r −1 colours, we have H 6✓T r−1(n) for all n 2 N, and hence
tr−1(n) 6 ex(n, H) .
On the other hand, H ✓Kr
s for all suﬃciently large s, so
ex(n, H) 6 ex(n, Kr
s)
for all those s. Let us ﬁx such an s. For every ✏> 0, Theorem 7.1.2
s
implies that eventually (i.e. for large enough n)
ex(n, Kr
s) < tr−1(n) + ✏n2.
Hence for n large,
tr−1(n)/
$n
2
%
6 ex(n, H)/
$n
2
%
6 ex(n, Kr
s)/
$n
2
%
< tr−1(n)/
$n
2
%
+ ✏n2/
$n
2
%
= tr−1(n)/
$n
2
%
+ 2✏/(1 −1
n)
6 tr−1(n)/
$n
2
%
+ 4✏
(assume n > 2).
Therefore, since tr−1(n)/
$n
2
%
converges to r−2
r−1 (Lemma 7.1.4), so does
ex(n, H)/
$n
2
%
.
⇤

185
For bipartite graphs H, Corollary 7.1.3 says that substantially fewer
than
$n
2
%
edges suﬃce to force an H subgraph. It turns out that
c1n2−
2
r+1 6 ex(n, Kr,r) 6 c2n2−1
r
for suitable constants c1, c2 depending on r; the lower bound is obtained
by random graphs,2 the upper bound is calculated in Exercise 12. If H
is a forest, then H ✓G as soon as "(G) is large enough, so ex(n, H) is at
most linear in n (Exercise 14). Erd˝os and S´os conjectured in 1963 that
Erd˝os-S´os
conjecture
ex(n, T) 6 1
2(k −1)n for all trees with k > 2 edges; as a general bound
for all n, this is best possible for every T (Exercises 15–17).
A related but rather di↵erent question is whether large values of
" or χ can force a graph G to contain a given tree T as an induced
subgraph. Of course, we need some additional assumption for this to
make sense – for example, to prevent G from just being a large complete
graph. The weakest sensible such assumption is that G has bounded
clique number, i.e., that G 6◆Kr for some ﬁxed integer r. Then large
average degree still does not force an induced copy of T – consider com-
plete bipartite graphs – but large chromatic number might: according to
the Gy´arf´as-Sumner conjecture from Chapter 5.6, there exists for every
r 2 N and every tree T an integer k = k(T, r) such that every graph G
with !(G) 6 r and χ(G) > k contains T as an induced subgraph.
7.2 Minors
In this section and the next we ask to what extent assumptions about
invariants of a graph such as average degree, chromatic number, or girth
can force it to contain another given graph as a minor or topological
minor.
As a starting question, let us consider the analogue of Tur´an’s the-
orem: how many edges on n vertices force a Kr minor or topological
minor? The qualitative answer is that, unlike for Kr subgraphs where
we might need as many as 1
2
r−2
r−1n2 edges, a number of edges linear in n
is enough: it suﬃces to assume that the graph has large enough average
degree (depending on r).
Proposition 7.2.1. Every graph of average degree at least 2r−2 has a
Kr minor, for all r 2 N.
Proof. We apply induction on r. For r 6 2 the assertion is trivial. For
the induction step let r > 3, and let G be any graph of average degree
at least 2r−2. Then "(G) > 2r−3; let H be a minimal minor of G with
"(H) > 2r−3. Pick a vertex x 2 H. By the minimality of H, x is not iso-
2 see Chapter 11
7.2 Minors
