[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 7. Extremal Graph Theory
현재 소단원: 7.3 Hadwiger's conjecture
직전 소단원: 「7.2 Minors」
[본문]
189
Large girth can also be used to force a topological Kr minor. We
now need some vertices of degree at least r−1 to serve as branch vertices,
but if we assume a minimum degree of r −1 to secure these, we can even
get by with a girth bound that is independent of r:
Theorem 7.2.7. (K¨uhn & Osthus 2002)
[7.3.9]
There exists a constant g such that G ◆TKr for every graph G satisfying
δ(G) > r −1 and g(G) > g.
7.3 Hadwiger’s conjecture
As we saw in Section 7.2, an average degree of c rplog r suﬃces to force
an arbitrary graph to have a Kr minor, and an average degree of cr2
forces it to have a topological Kr minor.
If we replace ‘average de-
gree’ above with ‘chromatic number’ then, with almost the same con-
stants c, the two assertions remain true: this is because every graph
with chromatic number k has a subgraph of average degree at least k −1
(Lemma 5.2.3).
Although both functions above, c rplog r and cr2, are best possible
(up to the constant c) for the said implications with ‘average degree’,
the question arises whether they are still best possible with ‘chromatic
number’ – or whether some slower-growing function would do in that
case. What lies hidden behind this problem about growth rates is a fun-
damental question about the nature of the invariant χ: can this invariant
have some direct structural e↵ect on a graph in terms of forcing concrete
substructures, or is its e↵ect no greater than that of the ‘unstructural’
property of having lots of edges somewhere, which it implies trivially?
Neither for general nor for topological minors is the answer to this
question known. For general minors, however, the following conjecture
of Hadwiger suggests a positive answer:
Conjecture. (Hadwiger 1943)
The following implication holds for every integer r > 0 and every
graph G:
χ(G) > r
)
G < Kr.
Hadwiger’s conjecture is trivial for r 6 2, easy for r = 3 and r = 4
(exercises), and equivalent to the four colour theorem for r = 5 and
r = 6. For r > 7 the conjecture is open, but it is true for line graphs
(Exercise 34) and for graphs of large girth (Exercise 32; see also Corol-
lary 7.3.9). Rephrased as G < Kχ(G), it is true for almost all graphs.3
In general, the conjecture for r + 1 implies it for r (exercise).
3 See Chapter 11 for the notion of ‘almost all’.
7.3 Hadwiger’s conjecture

190
7. Extremal Graph Theory
The Hadwiger conjecture for any ﬁxed r is equivalent to the asser-
tion that every graph without a Kr minor has an (r −1)-colouring. In
this reformulation, the conjecture raises the question of what the graphs
without a Kr minor look like: any suﬃciently detailed structural de-
scription of those graphs should enable us to decide whether or not they
can be (r −1)-coloured.
For r = 3, for example, the graphs without a Kr minor are precisely
the forests (why?), and these are indeed 2-colourable. For r = 4, there
is also a simple structural characterization of the graphs without a Kr
minor:
Proposition 7.3.1. A graph with at least three vertices is edge-maximal
[12.6.2]
without a K4 minor if and only if it can be constructed recursively from
triangles by pasting4 along K2s.
Proof. Recall ﬁrst that every IK4 contains a TK4, because ∆(K4) = 3
(1.7.3)
(4.4.4)
(Proposition 1.7.3); the graphs without a K4 minor thus coincide with
those without a topological K4 minor. The forward implication is left
as an easy exercise. To prove Hadwiger’s conjecture for r = 4 we only
need the backward implication, which we prove by induction on |G|.
Let G be edge-maximal without a TK4. Then (G) 6 2, as at the
start of the proof of Lemma 3.2.2. Hence either G is a triangle, or the
assertion follows from the induction hypothesis by Lemma 4.4.4.5
⇤
One of the interesting consequences of Proposition 7.3.1 is that all
the edge-maximal graphs without a K4 minor have the same number of
edges, and are thus all ‘extremal’:
Corollary 7.3.2. Every edge-maximal graph G without a K4 minor
has 2 |G| −3 edges.
Proof. Induction on |G|.
⇤
Corollary 7.3.3. Hadwiger’s conjecture holds for r = 4.
Proof. If G arises from G1 and G2 by pasting along a complete graph,
then χ(G) = max {χ(G1), χ(G2)} (see the proof of Proposition 5.5.2).
Hence, Proposition 7.3.1 implies by induction on |G| that all edge-maxi-
mal (and hence all) graphs without a K4 minor can be 3-coloured.
⇤
It is also possible to prove Corollary 7.3.3 by a simple direct argument
(Exercise 33).
4 This was deﬁned formally in Chapter 5.5.
5 The proof of this lemma is elementary and can be read independently of the
rest of Chapter 4.

7.3 Hadwiger’s conjecture
191
By the four colour theorem, Hadwiger’s conjecture for r = 5 follows
from the following structure theorem for the graphs without a K5 minor,
just as it follows from Proposition 7.3.1 for r = 4. The proof of Theorem
7.3.4 is similar to that of Proposition 7.3.1, but considerably longer. We
therefore state the theorem without proof:
Theorem 7.3.4. (Wagner 1937)
Let G be an edge-maximal graph without a K5 minor. If |G| > 4 then
G can be constructed recursively, by pasting along triangles and K2s,
from plane triangulations and copies of the graph W (Fig. 7.3.1).
=
=
Fig. 7.3.1. Three representations of the Wagner graph W
Using Corollary 4.2.10, one can easily compute which of the graphs
(4.2.10)
constructed as in Theorem 7.3.4 have the most edges. It turns out that
these extremal graphs without a K5 minor have no more edges than
those that are extremal with respect to {IK5, IK3,3}, i.e. the maximal
planar graphs:
Corollary 7.3.5. A graph with n vertices and no K5 minor has at most
3n −6 edges.
⇤
Since χ(W) = 3, Theorem 7.3.4 and the four colour theorem imply
Hadwiger’s conjecture for r = 5:
Corollary 7.3.6. Hadwiger’s conjecture holds for r = 5.
⇤
The Hadwiger conjecture for r = 6 is again substantially more dif-
ﬁcult than the case r = 5, and again it relies on the four colour theo-
rem. The proof shows (without using the four colour theorem) that any
minimal-order counterexample arises from a planar graph by adding one
vertex – so by the four colour theorem it is not a counterexample after all.
Theorem 7.3.7. (Robertson, Seymour & Thomas 1993)
Hadwiger’s conjecture holds for r = 6.

192
7. Extremal Graph Theory
As mentioned earlier, the challenge posed by Hadwiger’s conjecture
is to devise a proof technique that makes better use of the assumption of
χ > r than just using its consequence of δ > r −1 in a suitable subgraph,
which we know cannot force a Kr minor (Theorem 7.2.4). See the notes
for some recent advances in this direction.
If we resign ourselves to using just δ > r −1, we can still ask what
additional assumptions might help in making this force a Kr minor.
Theorem 7.2.7 says that an assumption of large girth has this e↵ect;
see also Exercise 32. In fact, a much weaker assumption suﬃces: for
any ﬁxed s 2 N and all large enough d depending only on s, the graphs
G 6◆Ks,s of average degree at least d can be shown to have Kr minors
for r considerably larger than d. For Hadwiger’s conjecture, this implies
the following:
Theorem 7.3.8. (K¨uhn & Osthus 2005)
For every integer s there is an integer rs such that Hadwiger’s conjecture
holds for all graphs G 6◆Ks,s and r > rs.
The strengthening of Hadwiger’s conjecture that graphs of chro-
matic number at least r contain Kr as a topological minor has become
known as Haj´os’s conjecture. It is false in general, but Theorem 7.2.7
implies it for graphs of large girth:
Corollary 7.3.9. There is a constant g such that all graphs G of girth
at least g satisfy the implication χ(G) > r ) G ◆TKr for all r.
Proof. Let g be the constant from Theorem 7.2.7. If χ(G) > r then, by
(5.2.3)
(7.2.7)
Lemma 5.2.3, G has a subgraph H of minimum degree δ(H) > r −1. As
g(H) > g(G) > g, Theorem 7.2.7 implies that G ◆H ◆TKr.
⇤
7.4 Szemer´edi’s regularity lemma
Some 50 years ago, in the course of the proof of a theorem about arith-
metic progressions of integers, Szemer´edi developed a graph-theoretical
tool that has since come to dominate methods in extremal graph theory
like none other: his regularity lemma. Very roughly, the lemma says
that all graphs can be approximated by random graphs in the following
sense: every graph can be partitioned, into a bounded number of equal
parts, so that most of its edges run between di↵erent parts and the edges
between any two parts are distributed fairly uniformly – just as we would
expect it if they had been generated at random.
