[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 8. Infinite Graphs
현재 소단원: 8.1 Basic notions, facts and techniques (분할 part 1)
직전 소단원: 「7.ex Exercises」
[본문]
8
Inﬁnite Graphs
The study of inﬁnite graphs is an attractive, but often neglected, part of
graph theory. This chapter aims to give an introduction that starts gent-
ly, but then moves on in several directions to display both the breadth
and some of the depth that this ﬁeld has to o↵er. Our overall theme will
be to highlight the typical kinds of phenomena that will always appear
when graphs are inﬁnite, and to show how they can lead to deep and
fascinating problems.
Perhaps the most typical such phenomena occur already when the
graphs are ‘only just’ inﬁnite, when they have only countably many
vertices and perhaps only ﬁnitely many edges at each vertex. This is not
surprising: after all, some of the most basic structural features of graphs,
such as paths, are intrinsically countable. Problems that become really
interesting only for uncountable graphs tend to be interesting for reasons
that have more to do with sets than with graphs, and are studied in com-
binatorial set theory. This, too, is a fascinating ﬁeld, but not our topic
in this chapter. The problems we shall consider will all be interesting
for countable graphs, and set-theoretic problems will not arise.
The terminology we need is exactly the same as for ﬁnite graphs,
except when we wish to describe an aspect of inﬁnite graphs that has no
ﬁnite counterpart. One important such aspect is the eventual behaviour
of the inﬁnite paths in a graph, which is captured by the notion of ends.
The ends of a graph can be thought of as additional limit points at in-
ﬁnity to which its inﬁnite paths converge. This convergence is described
formally in terms of a natural topology placed on the graph together with
its ends. In Sections 6–8 we shall therefore assume familiarity with the
basic concepts of point-set topology; reminders of the relevant deﬁnitions
will be included as they arise.
227
R. Diestel, Graph Theory, Graduate Texts in Mathematics 173,  
© Reinhard Diestel, under licence (exclusive for the print edition) 2025
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-70107-2_8

228
8. Inﬁnite Graphs
8.1 Basic notions, facts and techniques
This section gives a gentle introduction to the aspects of inﬁnity most
commonly encountered in graph theory.1
After just a couple of deﬁnitions, we begin by looking at a few
obvious properties of inﬁnite sets, and how they can be employed in
the context of graphs. We then illustrate how to use the three most
basic common tools in inﬁnite graph theory: Zorn’s lemma, transﬁnite
induction, and something called ‘compactness’. We complete the section
with the combinatorial deﬁnition of an end; topological aspects will be
treated in Section 8.6.
A graph is locally ﬁnite if all its vertices have ﬁnite degrees. An in-
locally
ﬁnite
ﬁnite graph (V, E) of the form
V = {x0, x1, x2, . . .}
E = {x0x1, x1x2, x2x3, . . .}
is called a ray, and a double ray is an inﬁnite graph (V, E) of the form
rays
V = {. . . , x−1, x0, x1, . . .}
E = {. . . , x−1x0, x0x1, x1x2, . . .} ;
in both cases the xn are assumed to be distinct. Thus, up to isomor-
phism, there is only one ray and one double ray, the latter being the
unique inﬁnite 2-regular connected graph.
In the context of inﬁnite
graphs, ﬁnite paths, rays and double rays are all called paths.
path
The subrays of a ray or double ray are its tails. Formally, every
tail
ray has inﬁnitely many tails, but any two of them di↵er only by a ﬁnite
initial segment. The union of a ray R with inﬁnitely many disjoint ﬁnite
paths having precisely their ﬁrst vertex on R is a comb; the last vertices
comb
of those paths are the teeth of this comb, and R is its spine. (If such a
teeth, spine
path is trivial, which we allow, then its unique vertex lies on R and also
counts as a tooth; see Figure 8.1.1.)
x0
x1
x2
R
. . .
Fig. 8.1.1. A comb with white teeth and spine R = x0x1 . . .
1 This introductory section is deliberately kept informal, with the emphasis on
ideas rather than deﬁnitions that do not belong in a graph theory book. A more
formal reminder of those basic deﬁnitions about inﬁnite sets and numbers that we
shall need is given in Appendix A at the end of the book.

8.1 Basic notions, facts and techniques
229
Let us now look at a few very basic properties of inﬁnite sets, and
see how they appear in some typical arguments about graphs.
An inﬁnite set minus a ﬁnite subset is still inﬁnite.
(1)
This trivial property is eminently useful when the inﬁnite set in
question plays the role of ‘supplies’ that keep an iterated process going.
For example, let us show that if a graph G is inﬁnitely connected (that
is, if G is k-connected for every k 2 N), then G contains a subdivision
of K@0, the complete graph of order |N|. We embed K@0 in G (as a
K@0
topological minor) in one inﬁnite sequence2 of steps, as follows.
We
begin by enumerating its vertices. Then at each step we embed the next
vertex in G, connecting it to the images of its earlier neighbours by paths
in G that avoid any other vertices used so far. The point here is that
each new path has to avoid only ﬁnitely many previously used vertices,
which is not a problem since deleting any ﬁnite set of vertices keeps G
inﬁnitely connected.
If G, too, is countable, can we then also ﬁnd a TK@0 as a spanning
subgraph of G? Although embedding K@0 in G topologically as above
takes inﬁnitely many steps, it is by no means guaranteed that the TK@0
constructed uses all the vertices of G.
However, it is not diﬃcult to
ensure this: since we are free to choose the image of each new vertex
of K@0, we can choose this as the next unused vertex from some ﬁxed
enumeration of V (G). In this way, every vertex of G gets chosen eventu-
ally, unless it becomes part of the TK@0 before its time, as a subdividing
vertex on one of the paths.
Unions of countably many countable sets are countable.
(2)
This fact can be applied in two ways: to show that sets that come
to us as countable unions are ‘small’, but also to rewrite a countable set
deliberately as a disjoint union of inﬁnitely many inﬁnite subsets. For an
example of the latter type of application, let us show that an inﬁnitely
edge-connected countable graph has inﬁnitely many edge-disjoint span-
ning trees. (Note that the converse implication is trivial.) The trick is
to construct the trees simultaneously, in one inﬁnite sequence of steps.
We ﬁrst use (2) to partition N into inﬁnitely many inﬁnite subsets Ni
(i 2 N). Then at step n we look which Ni contains n, and add a further
vertex v to the ith tree Ti. As before, we choose v minimal in some ﬁxed
enumeration of V (G) among the vertices not yet in Ti, and join v to Ti
by a path avoiding the ﬁnitely many edges used so far.
Clearly, a countable set cannot have uncountably many disjoint sub-
sets. However,
2 We reserve the term ‘inﬁnite sequence’ for sequences indexed by the set of
natural numbers. (In the language of well-orderings: for sequences of order type !.)

230
8. Inﬁnite Graphs
A countable set can have uncountably many subsets whose
pairwise intersections are all ﬁnite.
(3)
This is a remarkable property of countable sets, and a good source of
counterexamples to rash conjectures. Can you prove it without looking
at Figure 8.1.4?
Another common pitfall in dealing with inﬁnite sets is to assume
that the intersection of an inﬁnite nested sequence A0 ◆A1 ◆. . . of
inﬁnite (or uncountable) sets must still be inﬁnite (or uncountable). It
need not be; in fact it may be empty. (Examples?)
Before we move on to our discussion of common inﬁnite proof tech-
niques, let us look at one more type of construction. One often wants
to construct a graph G with a property that is in some sense local, a
property that has more to do with the ﬁnite subgraphs of G than with
G itself. Rather than formalize what exactly this should mean, let us
consider an example: given two large integers k and g, let us construct
a graph G that is k-connected and has girth at least g.3
We start with a cycle of length g; call it G0. This graph has the
right girth, but it is not k-connected. To cure this defect for the vertices
of G0, join every pair of them by k new independent paths, keeping all
these paths internally disjoint. If we choose the paths long enough, the
resulting graph G1 will again have girth g, and no two vertices of G0
can be separated in it by fewer than k other vertices. Of course, G1 is
not k-connected either.
But we can repeat the construction step for
the pairs of vertices of G1, extending G1 to G2, and so on. The limit
graph G = S
n2N Gn will again have girth g, since any short cycle would
have appeared in some Gn on the way. And, unlike all the Gn, it will be
k-connected: since every two vertices are contained in some common Gn,
they cannot be separated by fewer than k other vertices in Gn+1, let alone
in G.
There are a few basic proof techniques that are found frequently in
inﬁnite combinatorics. The two most common of these are the use of
Zorn’s lemma and transﬁnite induction. Rather than describing these
formally,4 we illustrate their use by a simple example.
Proposition 8.1.1. Every connected graph contains a spanning tree.
First proof (by Zorn’s lemma).
Given a connected graph G, consider the set of all trees T ✓G, ordered
by the subgraph relation. Since G is connected, any maximal such tree
contains every vertex of G, i.e. is a spanning tree of G.
3 There are ﬁnite such graphs, but they are much harder to construct; we shall
prove their existence by random methods in Chapter 11.2.
4 Appendix A o↵ers brief introductions to both, enough to enable the reader to
use these tools with conﬁdence in practice.

8.1 Basic notions, facts and techniques
231
To prove that a maximal tree exists, we have to show that for any
chain C of such trees there is an upper bound: a tree T ⇤✓G containing
every tree in C as a subgraph. We claim that T ⇤:= S C is such a tree.
To show that T ⇤is connected, let u, v 2 T ⇤be two vertices. Then
in C there is a tree Tu containing u and a tree Tv containing v. One of
these is a subgraph of the other, say Tu ✓Tv. Then Tv contains a path
from u to v, and this path is also contained in T ⇤.
To show that T ⇤is acyclic, suppose it contains a cycle C. Each of the
edges of C lies in some tree in C. These trees form a ﬁnite subchain of C,
which has a maximal element T. Then C ✓T, a contradiction.
⇤
Transﬁnite induction and recursion are very similar to ﬁnite induc-
tive proofs and constructions, respectively. Basically, one proceeds step
by step, and may at each step assume as known what was shown or
constructed before. The only di↵erence is that one may ‘start again’
after performing any inﬁnite number of steps. This is formalized by the
use of ordinals rather than natural numbers for counting the steps; see
Appendix A.
Just as with ﬁnite graphs, it is usually more intuitive to construct a
desired object (such as a spanning tree) step by step, rather than start-
ing with some unknown ‘maximal’ object and then proving that it has
the desired properties. More importantly, a step-by-step construction
is almost always the best way to ﬁnd the desired object: only later,
when one understands the construction well, can one devise an induc-
tive ordering (one whose chains have upper bounds) in which the desired
objects appear as the maximal elements. Thus, although Zorn’s lemma
may at times provide an elegant way to wrap up a constructive proof, it
cannot in general replace a good understanding of transﬁnite induction –
just as a preference for elegant direct deﬁnitions of ﬁnite objects cannot,
for a thorough understanding, replace the more pedestrian algorithmic
approach.
Our second proof of Proposition 8.1.1 illustrates both the construct-
ive and the proof aspect of transﬁnite induction in the typical intertwined
way. We deﬁne larger and larger subgraphs T↵✓G inductively. At each
step ↵we prove that T↵is a tree. The deﬁnition of T↵will assume and
use that subgraphs Tβ for all β < ↵have been previously deﬁned, but
not only this: it needs to assume that they are nested trees. This fact,
therefore, has to be proved along with the recursive deﬁnition, always
‘just before’ it is needed.
Second proof (by transﬁnite induction).
Let G be a connected graph. We deﬁne trees T↵✓G recursively so that
Tβ ✓T↵for all β < ↵.
(⇤↵)

232
8. Inﬁnite Graphs
Let T0 consist of a single vertex. Given a limit ordinal ↵> 0, let
T↵:= S
β<↵Tβ. Since the Tβ are trees satisfying (⇤β), our new T↵is
also a tree (as in the ﬁrst proof), and it clearly satisﬁes (⇤↵).
Given a successor ↵= β + 1, we ﬁrst check whether G −Tβ = ;. If
so, then Tβ is a spanning tree and we terminate the recursion. If not,
then G −Tβ has a vertex v↵that sends an edge e↵to a vertex in Tβ.
Then T↵, obtained from Tβ by adding v↵and e↵, is a tree satisfying (⇤↵).
It remains to check that our recursion does indeed terminate. But if
vβ+1 gets deﬁned for all β < γ then β 7! vβ+1 is an injective map showing
that |γ| 6 |G|. This cannot hold for all ordinals γ; it fails, for example,
when γ represents a well-ordering of the power set of V (G).
⇤
Why did these proofs work so smoothly? The reason is that the
forbidden substructures, cycles, were ﬁnite and therefore could not arise
unexpectedly at limit steps. If we wanted to construct a rayless span-
ning tree, on the other hand, one that contains no ray, then the edges
of partial ﬁnite trees Tβ might combine to form a ray in T↵= S
β<↵Tβ
when ↵is a limit. And indeed, here lies the challenge in most transﬁnite
constructions: to make the right choices at successor steps to ensure that
the structure will also be as desired at limits.
Our third basic proof technique, somewhat mysteriously referred to
as compactness (see below for why), o↵ers a formalized way of making
compactness
proofs
the right choices in certain standard cases. These are cases where nothing
unexpected happens at limits, but a choice that looks good at the time
it is made may lead to a dead end after another ﬁnite number of steps –
unlike the creation of a cycle, which is visible at once.
For example, let G be a graph whose ﬁnite subgraphs are all k-
colourable. It is natural then to try to construct a k-colouring of G as
a limit of k-colourings of its ﬁnite subgraphs. Now each ﬁnite subgraph
will have several k-colourings; will it matter which we choose? Clearly, it
will. When G0 ✓G00 are two ﬁnite subgraphs and u, v are vertices of G0
that receive the same colour in every k-colouring of G00 (and hence also
in any k-colouring of G), we must not give them di↵erent colours in the
colouring we choose for G0, even if such a colouring exists. However if
we do manage, somehow, to colour the ﬁnite subgraphs of G compatibly,
we shall automatically have a colouring of all of G.
All compactness proofs deal with situations similar to this. We wish
to solve a problem about an inﬁnite structure, and we know how to solve
it for all the ﬁnite substructures. ‘Compactness’ enables us to combine
these partial solutions to an overall solution if the partial solutions are
compatible in the right way.
For countable structures, all this – the choices, the dead ends, the
compatibility requirement on the ﬁnite solutions, and how they combine
to an overall solution – can be made visible in a particularly intuitive
way, by a graph:

8.1 Basic notions, facts and techniques
233
Lemma 8.1.2. (K¨onig’s Inﬁnity Lemma)
Let V0, V1, . . . be an inﬁnite sequence of disjoint non-empty ﬁnite sets,
[8.2.1]
[8.2.6]
[8.6.1]
[8.6.10]
[8.7.3]
[9.1.3]
and let G be a graph on their union. Assume that every vertex v in a
set Vn with n > 1 has a neighbour f(v) in Vn−1. Then G contains a ray
v0v1 . . . with vn 2 Vn for all n.
V0
V1
V2
V3
f(v)
f(
f(
v))
v
Fig. 8.1.2. K¨onig’s inﬁnity lemma
Proof. Let P be the set of all ﬁnite paths of the form v f(v) f(f(v)) . . .
ending in V0. Since V0 is ﬁnite but P is inﬁnite, inﬁnitely many of the
paths in P end at the same vertex v0 2 V0. Of these paths, inﬁnitely
many also agree on their penultimate vertex v1 2 V1, because V1 is ﬁnite.
Of those paths, inﬁnitely many agree even on their vertex v2 in V2 – and
so on. Although the set of paths considered decreases from step to step,
it is still inﬁnite after any ﬁnite number of steps, so vn gets deﬁned for
every n 2 N. By deﬁnition, each vertex vn is adjacent to vn−1 on one of
those paths, so v0v1 . . . is indeed a ray.
⇤
The following ‘compactness theorem’, the ﬁrst of its kind in graph
theory, answers our question about colourings:
Theorem 8.1.3. (de Bruijn & Erd˝os, 1951)
Let G = (V, E) be a graph and k 2 N. If every ﬁnite subgraph of G has
chromatic number at most k, then so does G.
First proof (for G countable, by the inﬁnity lemma).
Let v0, v1, . . . be an enumeration of V and put Gn := G[v0, . . . , vn]. Write
Vn for the set of all k-colourings of Gn with colours in {1, . . . , k}. Deﬁne
a graph on S
n2N Vn by inserting all edges cc0 such that c 2 Vn and
c0 2 Vn−1 is the restriction of c to {v0, . . . , vn−1}. Let c0c1 . . . be a ray
in this graph with cn 2 Vn for all n. Then c := S
n2N cn is a colouring
of G with colours in {1, . . . , k}.
⇤
Applications of the inﬁnity lemma such as this one rely on the fact
that a countable graph can be exhausted by a nested sequence of ﬁnite
subgraphs. Appendix A o↵ers a version of the inﬁnity lemma that works
for arbitrary graphs, in which these ﬁnite subgraphs need not be sequen-
tially ordered. This general version is still very intuitive and can be used
conveniently in many settings, including a proof of Theorem 8.1.3.

234
8. Inﬁnite Graphs
The essence of compactness proofs is often encoded more directly,
if less graphically, in terms of just sets and functions. The compactness
principle from Appendix A is such a version that is particularly easy to
apply. We illustrate its application by another proof of Theorem 8.1.3:
Second proof (for arbitrary graphs, by the compactness principle).
Let X := V and S := {1, . . . , k}. Let F be the set of all ﬁnite subsets
of V. For each Y
2 F let A(Y ) be the set of k-colourings of G[Y ]. Our
proof of Theorem 8.1.3 will be complete once we have found a function
V !{1, . . . , k} that induces a k-colouring on every ﬁnite subgraph G[Y ],
as any such function is clearly a k-colouring of G.
By the compactness principle it suﬃces to show that, given any ﬁnite
Y ✓F, we can ﬁnd a function V ! {1, . . . , k} that induces a colouring
on every G[Y ] with Y
2 Y. But this is easy: just take a k-colouring of
the ﬁnite graph G[S Y], and extend it arbitrarily to the rest of V.
⇤
Our last proof of Theorem 8.1.3 appeals directly to compactness
as deﬁned in topology. Recall that a topological space is compact if its
closed sets have the ‘ﬁnite intersection property’, which means that the
overall intersection T A of a set A of closed sets is non-empty whenever
every ﬁnite subset of A has a non-empty intersection. By Tychono↵’s
theorem of general topology, any product of compact spaces is compact
in the usual product topology.
Third proof (for arbitrary graphs, by Tychono↵’s theorem).
Consider the product space
X :=
Y
V
{1, . . . , k} = {1, . . . , k}V
of |V | copies of the ﬁnite set {1, . . . , k} endowed with the discrete topol-
ogy. By Tychono↵’s theorem, this is a compact space. Its basic open
sets have the form
Oh := { f 2 X : f|U = h } ,
where h is some map from a ﬁnite set U ✓V to {1, . . . , k}.
For every ﬁnite set U ✓V, let AU be the set of all f 2 X whose
restriction to U is a k-colouring of G[U]. These sets AU are closed (as
well as open – why?), and for any ﬁnite set U of ﬁnite subsets of V we
have T
U 2U AU 6= ;, because G[S U] has a k-colouring. By the ﬁnite
intersection property of the sets AU, their overall intersection is non-
empty, and every element of this intersection is a k-colouring of G.
⇤

8.1 Basic notions, facts and techniques
235
Although our three compactness proofs look formally di↵erent, it is
instructive to compare them in detail, checking how the requirements in
one are reﬂected in the other (cf. Exercise 18).
As mentioned before, the standard use for compactness proofs is to
transfer theorems from ﬁnite to inﬁnite graphs, or conversely. This is
not always quite as straightforward as above; often, the statement has to
be modiﬁed a little to make it susceptible to a compactness argument.
As an example – see Exercises 19–30 for more – let us prove the lo-
cally ﬁnite version of the following famous conjecture. Call a bipartition
of the vertex set of a graph unfriendly if every vertex has at least as many
neighbours in the other class as in its own. Clearly, every ﬁnite graph
has an unfriendly partition: just take any partition that maximizes the
number of edges between the partition classes. At the other extreme,
it can be shown by set-theoretic methods that uncountable graphs need
not have such partitions. Thus, intriguingly, it is the countable case that
has remained unsolved:
Unfriendly Partition Conjecture. Every countable graph admits an
unfriendly partition of its vertex set.
Proof for locally ﬁnite graphs. Let G = (V, E) be an inﬁnite but locally
ﬁnite graph, and enumerate its vertices as v0, v1, . . .. For every n 2 N,
let Vn be the set of partitions of Vn := {v0, . . . , vn} into two sets Un
and Wn such that every vertex v 2 Vn with NG(v) ✓Vn has at least
as many neighbours in the other class as in its own. Since the conjec-
ture holds for ﬁnite graphs, the sets Vn are non-empty. For all n > 1,
every (Un, Wn) 2 Vn induces a partition (Un−1, Wn−1) of Vn−1, which lies
in Vn−1. By the inﬁnity lemma, there is an inﬁnite sequence of partitions
(Un, Wn) 2 Vn, one for every n 2 N, such that each is induced by the
next. Then (S
n2N Un, S
n2N Wn) is an unfriendly partition of G.
⇤
The trick that made this proof possible was to require, for the par-
titions of Vn, correct positions only of vertices that send no edge out
of Vn: this weakening is necessary to ensure that partitions from Vn
induce partitions in Vn−1; but since, by local ﬁniteness, every vertex has
this property eventually (for large enough n), the weaker assumption
suﬃces to ensure that the limit partition is unfriendly.
Let us complete this section with an introduction to the one im-
portant concept of inﬁnite graph theory that has no ﬁnite counterpart,
the notion of an end. An end5 of a graph G is an equivalence class of
end
rays in G, where two rays are considered equivalent if, for every ﬁnite
set S ✓V (G), both have a tail in the same component of G −S. This
5 Not to be confused with the ends, or endvertices, of an edge. In the context of
inﬁnite graphs, we use the term ‘endvertices’ to avoid confusion.
