[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 8. Infinite Graphs
현재 소단원: 8.1 Basic notions, facts and techniques (분할 part 2)
직전 소단원: 「7.ex Exercises」
[본문]
236
8. Inﬁnite Graphs
is indeed an equivalence relation: note that, since S is ﬁnite, there is
exactly one such component for each ray. If two rays are equivalent –
and only then – they can be linked by inﬁnitely many disjoint paths:
just choose these inductively, taking as S the union of the vertex sets
of the ﬁrst ﬁnitely many paths to ﬁnd the next. The set of ends of G
is denoted by ⌦(G), and we write G = (V, E, ⌦) to express that G has
⌦(G)
vertex, edge and end sets V, E, ⌦.
For example, let us determine the ends of the 2-way inﬁnite ladder
shown in Figure 8.1.3. Every ray in this graph contains vertices arbi-
trarily far to the left or vertices arbitrarily far to the right, but not both.
These two types of rays are clearly equivalence classes, so the ladder has
exactly two ends. (In Figure 8.1.3 these are shown as two isolated dots –
one on the left, the other on the right.)
Fig. 8.1.3. The 2-way ladder has two ends
The ends of a tree are particularly simple: two rays in a tree are
equivalent if and only if they share a tail, and for every ﬁxed vertex v each
end contains exactly one ray starting at v. Even a locally ﬁnite tree can
have uncountably many ends. The prototype example (see Exercise 39)
is the binary tree T2, the rooted tree in which every vertex has exactly
binary
tree T2
two upper neighbours. Often, the vertex set of T2 is taken to be the
set of ﬁnite 0–1 sequences (with the empty sequence as the root), as
indicated in Figure 8.1.4. The ends of T2 then correspond bijectively to
01
011
0110
10
101
11
00
1
0
;
T2
Fig. 8.1.4. The binary tree T2 has continuum many ends, one
for every inﬁnite 0–1 sequence

237
its rays starting at ;, and hence to the inﬁnite 0–1 sequences.
These examples suggest that the ends of a graph can be thought of
as ‘points at inﬁnity’ to which its rays converge. We shall formalize this
in Section 8.6, where we deﬁne a natural topology on a graph and its
ends in which rays will indeed converge to their respective ends.
The maximum number of disjoint rays in an end is the (combina-
torial) vertex-degree of that end, the maximum number of edge-disjoint
end degrees
rays in it is its (combinatorial) edge-degree. These maxima are indeed
attained: if an end contains a set of k (edge-) disjoint rays for every inte-
ger k, it also contains an inﬁnite set of (edge-) disjoint rays (Exercise 46).
Thus, every end has a vertex-degree and an edge-degree in N [ {1}.
8.2 Paths, trees, and ends
There are two fundamentally di↵erent aspects to the inﬁnity of an inﬁnite
connected graph: one of ‘length’, expressed in the presence of rays, and
one of ‘width’, expressed locally by inﬁnite degrees. The inﬁnity lemma
tells us that at least one of these must occur:
Proposition 8.2.1. Every inﬁnite connected graph has a vertex of in-
ﬁnite degree or contains a ray.
Proof. Let G be an inﬁnite connected graph with all degrees ﬁnite. Let
(8.1.2)
v0 be a vertex, and for every n 2 N let Vn be the set of vertices at
distance n from v0. Induction on n shows that the sets Vn are ﬁnite, and
hence that Vn+1 6= ; (because G is inﬁnite and connected). Furthermore,
the neighbour of a vertex v 2 Vn+1 on any shortest v–v0 path lies in Vn.
By Lemma 8.1.2, G contains a ray.
⇤
Often it is useful to have more detailed information on how this ray
or vertex of inﬁnite degree lies in G. The following lemma enables us to
ﬁnd it ‘close to’ any given inﬁnite set of vertices.
Lemma 8.2.2. (Star-Comb Lemma)
[8.6.3]
Let U be an inﬁnite set of vertices in a connected graph G. Then G
contains either a comb with all teeth in U or a subdivision of an inﬁnite
star with all leaves in U.
Proof. As G is connected, it contains a path between two vertices in U.
This path is a tree T ✓G every edge of which lies on a path in T between
two vertices in U. By Zorn’s lemma there is a maximal such tree T ⇤.
Since U is inﬁnite and G is connected, T ⇤is inﬁnite. If T ⇤has a vertex
of inﬁnite degree, it contains the desired subdivided star.
8.2 Paths, trees, and ends
