[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 8. Infinite Graphs
현재 소단원: 8.3 Homogeneous and universal graphs
직전 소단원: 「8.2 Paths, trees, and ends」
[본문]
246
8. Inﬁnite Graphs
8.3 Homogeneous and universal graphs
Unlike ﬁnite graphs, inﬁnite graphs o↵er the possibility to represent an
entire graph property P by just one specimen, a single graph that con-
tains all the graphs in P up to some ﬁxed cardinality. Such graphs are
called ‘universal’ for this property.
More precisely, if 6 is a graph relation (such as the minor, topolo-
gical minor, subgraph, or induced subgraph relation up to isomorphism),
we call a countable graph G⇤universal in P (for 6) if G⇤2 P and G 6 G⇤
universal
for every countable graph G 2 P.
Is there a graph that is universal in the class of all countable graphs?
Suppose a graph R has the following property:
Whenever U and W are disjoint ﬁnite sets of vertices in R,
there exists a vertex v 2 R −U −W that is adjacent in R
to all the vertices in U but to none in W.
(⇤)
Then R is universal even for the strongest of all graph relations, the
induced subgraph relation. Indeed, in order to embed a given countable
graph G in R we just map its vertices v1, v2, . . . to R inductively, making
sure that vn gets mapped to a vertex v 2 R adjacent to the images of
all the neighbours of vn in G[v1, . . . , vn] but not adjacent to the image
of any non-neighbour of vn in G[v1, . . . , vn].
Clearly, this map is an
isomorphism between G and the subgraph of R induced by its image.
Theorem 8.3.1. (Erd˝os & R´enyi 1963)
[11.3.5]
There exists a unique countable graph R with property (⇤).
R
Proof. To prove existence, we construct a graph R with property (⇤)
inductively. Let R0 := K1. For all n 2 N, let Rn+1 be obtained from
Rn by adding for every set U ✓V (Rn) a new vertex v joined to all the
vertices in U but to none outside U. (In particular, the new vertices form
an independent set in Rn+1.) Clearly R := S
n2N Rn has property (⇤).
To prove uniqueness, let R = (V, E) and R0 = (V 0, E0) be two graphs
with property (⇤), each given with a ﬁxed vertex enumeration. We con-
struct a bijection ': V !V 0 in an inﬁnite sequence of steps, deﬁning '(v)
for one new vertex v 2 V at each step.
At every odd step we look at the ﬁrst vertex v in the enumeration
of V for which '(v) has not yet been deﬁned. Let U be the set of those
of its neighbours u in R for which '(u) has already been deﬁned. This
is a ﬁnite set. Using (⇤) for R0, ﬁnd a vertex v0 2 V 0 outside the image
of ' (which is a ﬁnite set), so that v0 is adjacent in R0 to all the vertices
in '(U) but to no other vertex in the image of '. Put '(v) := v0.
At even steps in the deﬁnition process we do the same thing with
the roles of R and R0 interchanged: we look at the ﬁrst vertex v0 in
the enumeration of V 0 that does not yet lie in the image of ', and set

8.3 Homogeneous and universal graphs
247
'(v) = v0 for a new vertex v that matches the adjacencies and non-
adjacencies of v0 among the vertices for which ' (resp. '−1) has already
been deﬁned.
By our minimum choices of v and v0, the bijection gets deﬁned on
all of V and all of V 0, and it is clearly an isomorphism.
⇤
The graph R in Theorem 8.3.1 is usually called the Rado graph,
Rado graph
named after Richard Rado who gave one of its earliest explicit deﬁ-
nitions.
The method of constructing a bijection in alternating steps,
as in the uniqueness part of the proof, is known as the back-and-forth
technique.
The Rado graph R is unique in another rather fascinating respect.
We shall hear more about this in Chapter 11.3, but in a nutshell it is the
following. If we generate a countably inﬁnite random graph by admit-
ting its pairs of vertices as edges independently with some ﬁxed positive
probability p 2 (0, 1), then with probability 1 the resulting graph has
property (⇤), and is hence isomorphic to R ! In the context of inﬁnite
graphs, the Rado graph is therefore also called the (countably inﬁnite)
inﬁnite
random
graph
random graph.
As one would expect of a random graph, the Rado graph shows
a high degree of uniformity. One aspect of this is its resilience against
small changes: the deletion of ﬁnitely many vertices or edges, and similar
local changes, leave it ‘unchanged’ and result in just another copy of R
(Exercise 54).
The following rather extreme aspect of uniformity, however, is still
surprising: no matter how we partition the vertex set of R into two
parts, at least one of the parts will induce another isomorphic copy of R.
Trivial examples aside, the Rado graph is the only countable graph with
this property, and hence unique in yet another respect:
Proposition 8.3.2. The Rado graph is the unique countable graph G
other than K@0 and K@0 such that, no matter how V (G) is partitioned
into two parts, one of the parts induces an isomorphic copy of G.
Proof. We ﬁrst show that the Rado graph R has the partition property.
Let {V1, V2} be a partition of V (R). If (⇤) fails in both R[V1] and R[V2],
say for sets U1, W1 and U2, W2, respectively, then (⇤) fails for U = U1 [U2
and W = W1 [ W2 in R, a contradiction.
To show uniqueness, let G = (V, E) be a countable graph with the
partition property. Let V1 be its set of isolated vertices, and V2 the rest.
If V1 6= ; then G 6⇠= G[V2], since G has isolated vertices but G[V2] does
not. Hence G = G[V1] ⇠= K@0. Similarly, if G has a vertex adjacent to
all other vertices, then G = K@0.
Assume now that G has no isolated vertex and no vertex joined
to all other vertices. If G is not the Rado graph then there are sets
U, W for which (⇤) fails in G; choose these with |U [ W| minimum.

248
8. Inﬁnite Graphs
Assume ﬁrst that U 6= ;, and pick u 2 U. Let V1 consist of u and all
vertices outside U [ W that are not adjacent to u, and let V2 contain
the remaining vertices. As u is isolated in G[V1], we have G 6⇠= G[V1]
and hence G ⇠= G[V2]. By the minimality of |U [ W|, there is a vertex
v 2 G[V2] −U −W that is adjacent to every vertex in U r {u} and to
none in W. But v is also adjacent to u, because it lies in V2. So U, W
and v satisfy (⇤) for G, contrary to assumption.
Finally, assume that U = ;. Then W 6= ;. Pick w 2 W, and consider
the partition {V1, V2} of V where V1 consists of w and all its neighbours
outside W. As before, G 6⇠= G[V1] and hence G ⇠= G[V2]. Therefore U
and W r{w} satisfy (⇤) in G[V2], with v 2 V2 rW say, and then U, W, v
satisfy (⇤) in G.
⇤
Another indication of the high degree of uniformity in the structure
of the Rado graph is its large automorphism group. For example, R is
easily seen to be vertex-transitive: given any two vertices x and y, there
is an automorphism of R mapping x to y.
In fact, much more is true: using the back-and-forth technique, one
can easily show that the Rado graph is homogeneous: every isomorphism
homoge-
neous
between two ﬁnite induced subgraphs can be extended to an automor-
phism of the entire graph (Exercise 56).
Which other countable graphs are homogeneous?
The complete
graph K@0 and its complement are again obvious examples. Moreover,
for every integer r > 3 there is a homogeneous Kr-free graph Rr, con-
structed as follows. Let Rr
0 := K1, and let Rr
n+1 be obtained from Rr
n
by joining, for every induced subgraph H 6◆Kr−1 of Rr
n, a new vertex
vH to every vertex in H. Then let Rr := S
n2N Rr
n. Clearly, as the new
Rr
vertices vH of Rr
n+1 are independent, there is no Kr in Rr
n+1 if there
was none in Rr
n, so Rr 6◆Kr by induction on n. Just like the Rado
graph, Rr is clearly universal among the Kr-free countable graphs, and
by the back-and-forth argument from the proof of Theorem 8.3.1 it is
easily seen to be homogeneous.
By the following deep theorem of Lachlan and Woodrow, the count-
able homogeneous graphs we have seen so far are essentially all:
Theorem 8.3.3. (Lachlan & Woodrow 1980)
Every countably inﬁnite homogeneous graph is one of the following:
• a disjoint union of complete graphs of the same order, or the
complement of such a graph;
• the graph Rr or its complement, for some r > 3;
• the Rado graph R.
To conclude this section, let us return to our original problem: for
which graph properties is there a graph that is universal with this prop-
erty? Most investigations into this problem have addressed it from a

249
more general model-theoretic point of view, and have therefore been
based on the strongest of all graph relations, the induced subgraph rela-
tion. As a consequence, most of these results are negative; see the notes.
From a graph-theoretic point of view, it seems more promising to
look instead for universal graphs for the weaker subgraph relation, or
even the topological minor or minor relation. For example, while there
is no universal planar graph for subgraphs or induced subgraphs, there
is one for minors:
Theorem 8.3.4. (Diestel & K¨uhn 1999)
There exists a universal planar graph for the minor relation.
This remained the only result about universal graphs for the minor-
relation for over 20 years, until Georgakopoulos found 4-universal graphs
in Forb4(X) = { G | X 64 G } for X = K5 and X = K3,3, and proved
there is none for X = K@0.
8.4 Connectivity and matching
In this section we look at inﬁnite versions of Menger’s theorem and of the
matching theorems from Chapter 2. This area of inﬁnite graph theory is
one of its best developed ﬁelds, with several deep results. One of these,
however, stands out among the rest: a version of Menger’s theorem that
had been conjectured by Erd˝os decades ago, and was proved only fairly
recently by Aharoni and Berger. The techniques developed for its proof
inspired, over the years, much of the theory in this area.
Before we turn to this result, however, let us take a brief look at
edge-connectivity.
Recall from Section 8.1 that in an inﬁnitely edge-
connected countable graph we can easily ﬁnd inﬁnitely many edge-
disjoint spanning trees. Can we still ﬁnd such trees when the graph is
uncountable? We can, but this is not quite as easy to prove (Exercise 62).
The following deep theorem of Laviolette reduces the above prob-
lem to its countable case – as it does for many other problems involving
edge-connectivity. Let H be a set of countable graphs forming an edge-
decomposition of an arbitrary graph G. Call this decomposition bond-
faithful if every countable bond of G is contained in some H 2 H and
every ﬁnite bond of any H 2 H is a bond also of G. Note that the ﬁnite
bonds of G will be bonds of the H 2 H that contain them. (Why?)
Theorem 8.4.1. (Laviolette 2005)
Every graph has a bond-faithful decomposition into countable graphs.
We shall not be able to prove Laviolette’s theorem here. But let
us illustrate its power in reducing problems to their countable case by
deducing an early classic from the theory of inﬁnite graphs.
8.4 Connectivity and matching
