[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 8. Infinite Graphs
현재 소단원: 8.4 Connectivity and matching (분할 part 1)
직전 소단원: 「8.3 Homogeneous and universal graphs」
[본문]
249
more general model-theoretic point of view, and have therefore been
based on the strongest of all graph relations, the induced subgraph rela-
tion. As a consequence, most of these results are negative; see the notes.
From a graph-theoretic point of view, it seems more promising to
look instead for universal graphs for the weaker subgraph relation, or
even the topological minor or minor relation. For example, while there
is no universal planar graph for subgraphs or induced subgraphs, there
is one for minors:
Theorem 8.3.4. (Diestel & K¨uhn 1999)
There exists a universal planar graph for the minor relation.
This remained the only result about universal graphs for the minor-
relation for over 20 years, until Georgakopoulos found 4-universal graphs
in Forb4(X) = { G | X 64 G } for X = K5 and X = K3,3, and proved
there is none for X = K@0.
8.4 Connectivity and matching
In this section we look at inﬁnite versions of Menger’s theorem and of the
matching theorems from Chapter 2. This area of inﬁnite graph theory is
one of its best developed ﬁelds, with several deep results. One of these,
however, stands out among the rest: a version of Menger’s theorem that
had been conjectured by Erd˝os decades ago, and was proved only fairly
recently by Aharoni and Berger. The techniques developed for its proof
inspired, over the years, much of the theory in this area.
Before we turn to this result, however, let us take a brief look at
edge-connectivity.
Recall from Section 8.1 that in an inﬁnitely edge-
connected countable graph we can easily ﬁnd inﬁnitely many edge-
disjoint spanning trees. Can we still ﬁnd such trees when the graph is
uncountable? We can, but this is not quite as easy to prove (Exercise 62).
The following deep theorem of Laviolette reduces the above prob-
lem to its countable case – as it does for many other problems involving
edge-connectivity. Let H be a set of countable graphs forming an edge-
decomposition of an arbitrary graph G. Call this decomposition bond-
faithful if every countable bond of G is contained in some H 2 H and
every ﬁnite bond of any H 2 H is a bond also of G. Note that the ﬁnite
bonds of G will be bonds of the H 2 H that contain them. (Why?)
Theorem 8.4.1. (Laviolette 2005)
Every graph has a bond-faithful decomposition into countable graphs.
We shall not be able to prove Laviolette’s theorem here. But let
us illustrate its power in reducing problems to their countable case by
deducing an early classic from the theory of inﬁnite graphs.
8.4 Connectivity and matching

250
8. Inﬁnite Graphs
Let us call a cut F in a graph G even or odd if |F| is ﬁnite and even
even/odd
cut
or odd, respectively. Since cycles meet cuts in an even number of edges,
graphs with an odd cut cannot have an edge-decomposition into cycles.
Suprisingly, all other graphs do:
Theorem 8.4.2. (Nash-Williams 1960)
Every graph with no odd cut has an edge-decomposition into cycles.
Proof. By Theorem 8.4.1 we may assume that our graph G is countable;
let us enumerate its edges. We shall ﬁnd the desired cycles in ! steps.
At each step we shall assume inductively that every cut is inﬁnite or
even, ﬁnd a cycle, and delete its edges.
To ﬁnd that cycle, consider the ﬁrst remaining edge e = xy in our
enumeration. By our inductive assumption e is not a bridge, so there is
an x–y path not using e. Together with e this path forms a cycle, whose
edges we delete to complete this step. This deletion keeps every ﬁnite
cut even and every inﬁnite cut inﬁnite.
After at most ! steps no edges remain, so the cycles we found form
an edge-decomposition of G.
⇤
Let us now turn to the Aharoni-Berger theorem: the inﬁnite version
of Menger’s theorem originally conjectured by Erd˝os. We shall prove this
theorem for countable graphs, which will take up most of this section.
Although the countable case is much easier, the techniques it requires al-
ready give a good impression of the general proof. We then wind up with
an overview of inﬁnite matching theorems and a conjecture conceived in
the same spirit.
Recall that Menger’s theorem, in its simplest form, says that if A
and B are sets of vertices in a ﬁnite graph G, not necessarily disjoint,
and if k = k(G, A, B) is the minimum number of vertices separating A
from B in G, then G contains k disjoint A–B paths. (Clearly, it cannot
contain more.) The same holds, and is easily deduced from the ﬁnite
case, when G is inﬁnite but k is still ﬁnite:
Proposition 8.4.3. Let G be any graph, k 2 N, and let A, B be two
sets of vertices in G that can be separated by k but no fewer than k
vertices. Then G contains k disjoint A–B paths.
Proof. By assumption, every set of disjoint A–B paths has cardinality at
(3.3.1)
most k. Choose one, P say, of maximum cardinality. Suppose |P| < k.
Then no set X consisting of one vertex from each path in P separates A
from B. For each X, let PX be an A–B path avoiding X. Let H be the
union of S P with all these paths PX. This is a ﬁnite graph in which no
set of |P| vertices separates A from B. So H ✓G contains more than
|P| paths from A to B by Menger’s theorem (3.3.1), which contradicts
the choice of P.
⇤

8.4 Connectivity and matching
251
When k is inﬁnite, however, the result suddenly becomes trivial.
Indeed, let P be any maximal set of disjoint A–B paths in G. Then the
union of all these paths separates A from B, so P must be inﬁnite. But
then the cardinality of this union is no bigger than |P|. Thus, P contains
|P| =
.. S P
.. > k disjoint A–B paths, as desired.
Of course, this is no more than a trick played on us by inﬁnite car-
dinal arithmetic: although, numerically, the A–B separator consisting of
all the inner vertices of paths in P is no bigger than |P|, it uses far more
vertices to separate A from B than should be necessary. Or put another
way: when our path systems and separators are inﬁnite, their cardinal-
ities alone are no longer a suﬃciently ﬁne tool to distinguish carefully
chosen ‘small’ separators from unnecessarily large and wasteful ones.
To overcome this problem, Erd˝os suggested an alternative form of
Menger’s theorem, which for ﬁnite graphs is clearly equivalent to the
standard version. Recall that an A–B separator X is said to lie on a
set P of disjoint A–B paths if X consists of a choice of exactly one
vertex from each path in P. The following so-called Erd˝os-Menger con-
jecture, now a theorem, inﬂuenced much of the development of inﬁnite
Erd˝os-
Menger
conjecture
connectivity and matching theory:
Theorem 8.4.4. (Aharoni & Berger 2009)
Let G be any graph, and let A, B ✓V (G). Then G contains a set P of
disjoint A–B paths and an A–B separator on P.
The next few pages give a proof of Theorem 8.4.4 for countable G.
Of the three proofs we gave for the ﬁnite case of Menger’s theorem,
only the last has any chance of being adaptable to the inﬁnite case: the
others were by induction on |G| or | S P|, and both these parameters
may now be inﬁnite. The third proof, however, looks more promising:
recall that, by Lemmas 3.3.2 and 3.3.3, it provided us with a tool to
either ﬁnd a separator on a given system of A–B paths, or to construct
another system of A–B paths that covers more vertices in A and in B.
Lemmas 3.3.2 and 3.3.3 (whose proofs work for inﬁnite graphs too)
will indeed form a cornerstone of our proof for Theorem 8.4.4. However,
it will not do just to apply these lemmas inﬁnitely often. Indeed, al-
though any ﬁnite number of applications of Lemma 3.3.2 leaves us with
another system of disjoint A–B paths, an inﬁnite number of iterations
may leave nothing at all: each edge may be toggled on and o↵inﬁnitely
often by successive alternating paths, so that no ‘limit system’ of A–B
paths will be deﬁned. We shall therefore take another tack: starting at A,
we grow simultaneously as many disjoint paths towards B as possible.
To make this precise, we need some terminology.
Given a set
X ✓V (G), let us write GX!B for the subgraph of G induced by X
GX!B
and all the components of G −X that meet B.

252
8. Inﬁnite Graphs
Let W = ( Wa | a 2 A ) be a family of disjoint paths such that every
Wa starts in a. We call W an A ! B wave in G if the set Z of ﬁnal
wave
vertices of paths in W separates A from B in G. (Note that W may
contain inﬁnite paths, which have no ﬁnal vertex.) Sometimes, we shall
wish to consider A ! B waves in subgraphs of G that contain A but not
all of B. For this reason we do not formally require that B ✓V (G).
A
GX!B
B
X
Z
Fig. 8.4.1. A small A ! B wave W with boundary X
When W is a wave, then the set X ✓Z of those vertices in Z
that either lie in B or have a neighbour in GZ!B −Z is a minimal
A–B separator in G; note that z 2 Z lies in X if and only if it can be
linked to B by a path that has no vertex other than z on W. We call
X the boundary of W, and often use (W, X) as shorthand for the wave
boundary
(W, X)
W together with its boundary X. If all the paths in W are ﬁnite and
X = Z, we call the wave W large; otherwise it is small. We shall call
large/small
W proper if at least one of the paths in W is non-trivial, or if all its
proper
paths are trivial but its boundary is a proper subset of A. Every small
wave, for example, is proper. Note that while some A ! B wave always
exists, e.g. the family ( {a} | a 2 A ) of singleton paths, G need not have
a proper A ! B wave. (For example, if A consists of two vertices of
G = K10 and B of three other vertices, there is no proper A ! B wave.)
If (U, X) is an A ! B wave in G and (V, Y ) is an X ! B wave
in GX!B, then the family W = U + V obtained from U by appending
U + V
the paths of V (to those paths of U that end in X) is clearly an A ! B
wave in G, with boundary Y . Note that W is large if and only if both
V and U are large. W is greater than U in the following sense.
Given two path systems U = ( Ua | a 2 A ) and W = ( Wa | a 2 A ),
write U 6 W if Ua ✓Wa for every a 2 A. Given a chain (Wi, Xi)i2I
6
of waves in this ordering, with Wi = ( W i
a | a 2 A ) say, let W⇤=
( W ⇤
a | a 2 A ) be deﬁned by W ⇤
a := S
i2I W i
a. Then W⇤is an A ! B
wave: any A–B path is ﬁnite but meets every Xi, so at least one of its
vertices lies in Xi for arbitrarily large (Wi, Xi) and hence is the ﬁnal
vertex of a path in W⇤. Clearly Wi 6 W⇤for all i 2 I; we call W⇤the
limit of the waves Wi.
limit wave

8.4 Connectivity and matching
253
As every chain of A ! B waves is bounded above by its limit wave,
Zorn’s lemma implies that G has a maximal A ! B wave W; let X be
maximal
wave
its boundary. This wave (W, X) forms the ﬁrst step in our proof for
Theorem 8.4.4: if we can now ﬁnd disjoint paths in GX!B linking all
the vertices of X to B, then X will be an A–B separator on these paths
preceded by the paths of W that end in X.
By the maximality of W, there is no proper X !B wave in GX!B.
For our proof it will thus suﬃce to prove the following (renaming X as A):
Lemma 8.4.5. If G has no proper A ! B wave, then G contains a set
of disjoint A–B paths linking all of A to B.
Our approach to the proof of Lemma 8.4.5 is to enumerate the
vertices in A =: {a1, a2, . . .}, and to ﬁnd the required A–B paths
a1, a2, . . .
Pn = an . . . bn in turn for n = 1, 2, . . . . Since our premise in Lemma 8.4.5
Pn
is that G has no proper A ! B wave, we would like to choose P1 so that
G −P1 has no proper (A r {a1}) ! B wave: this would restore the same
premise to G −P1, and we could proceed to ﬁnd P2 in G −P1 in the
same way.
We shall not be able to choose P1 quite like this, but we shall be
able to do something almost as good. We shall construct P1 so that
deleting it (as well as a few more vertices outside A) leaves a graph that
has a large maximal (A r {a1}) ! B wave (W, A0). We then earmark
the paths Wn = an . . . a0
n (n > 2) of this wave as initial segments for the
paths Pn. By the maximality of W, there is no proper A0 ! B wave in
GA0!B. In other words, we have restored our original premise to GA0!B,
and can ﬁnd there an A0–B path P 0
2 = a0
2 . . . b2. Then P2 := a2W2a0
2P 0
2
is our second path for Lemma 8.4.5, and we continue inductively inside
GA0!B.
Given a set ˆA of vertices in G, let us call a vertex a /2 ˆA linkable
linkable
for (G, ˆA, B) if G −ˆA contains an a–B path P and a set X ◆V (P)
of vertices such that G −X has a large maximal ˆA ! B wave. (The
ﬁrst such a we shall be considering will be a1, and ˆA will be the set
{a2, a3, . . .}.)
Lemma 8.4.6. Let a⇤2 A and ˆA := A r {a⇤}, and assume that G has
no proper A ! B wave. Then a⇤is linkable for (G, ˆA, B).
Proof of Lemma 8.4.5 (assuming Lemma 8.4.6).
Let G be as in
Lemma 8.4.5, i.e. assume that G has no proper A ! B wave.
We
construct subgraphs G1, G2, . . . of G satisfying the following statement
(Fig. 8.4.2):

254
8. Inﬁnite Graphs
Gn contains a set An = {an
n, an
n+1, an
n+2, . . .} of distinct
vertices such that Gn has no proper An ! B wave.
In
G there are disjoint paths Pi (i < n) and W n
i
(i > n)
starting at ai. The Pi are disjoint from Gn and end in B.
The W n
i end in an
i and are otherwise disjoint from Gn.
(⇤)
Clearly, the paths P1, P2, . . . will satisfy Lemma 8.4.5.
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
B
a1
P1
an
n+1
an
n
Gn
A
an
an−1
W n
i
Pn−1
An
Fig. 8.4.2. Gn has no proper An ! B wave
Let G1 := G, and put a1
i := ai and W 1
i
:= {ai} for all i > 1.
Since by assumption G has no proper A ! B wave, these deﬁnitions
satisfy (⇤) for n = 1. Suppose now that (⇤) has been satisﬁed for n.
Put ˆAn := An r {an
n}. By Lemma 8.4.6 applied to Gn, we can ﬁnd in
Gn −ˆAn an an
n–B path P and a set Xn ◆V (P) such that Gn −Xn has
a large maximal ˆAn ! B wave (W, An+1). Let Pn be the path W n
n [ P.
For i > n + 1, let W n+1
i
be W n
i
followed by the path of W starting
at an
i , and call its last vertex an+1
i
. By the maximality of W there is no
proper An+1 ! B wave in Gn+1 := (Gn −Xn)An+1!B, so (⇤) is satisﬁed
for n + 1.
⇤
To complete our proof of Theorem 8.4.4, it remains to prove
Lemma 8.4.6. For this, we need another lemma:
Lemma 8.4.7. Let x be a vertex in G −A. If G has no proper A ! B
wave but G −x does, then every A ! B wave in G −x is large.
Proof.
Suppose G −x has a small A ! B wave (W, X).
Put B0 :=
(3.3.2)
(3.3.3)
X [ {x}, and let P denote the set of A–X paths in W (Fig. 8.4.3). If G
contains an A–B0 separator S on P, then replacing in W every P 2 P
with its initial segment ending in S we obtain a small (and hence proper)
A!B wave in G, which by assumption does not exist. By Lemmas 3.3.3

8.4 Connectivity and matching
255
x
B0
S
P
W
B
A
X
Fig. 8.4.3. A hypothetical small A ! B wave in G −x
and 3.3.2, therefore, G contains a set P0 of disjoint A–B0 paths exceed-
ing P. The set of last vertices of these paths contains X properly, and
hence must be all of B0 = X [ {x}. But B0 separates A from B in G, so
we can turn P0 into an A ! B wave in G by adding as singleton paths
any vertices of A it does not cover. As x lies on P0 but not in A, this is
a proper wave, which by assumption does not exist.
⇤
Proof of Lemma 8.4.6. We inductively construct trees T0 ✓T1 ✓. . .
in G −( ˆA [ B) and path systems W0 6 W1 6 . . . in G so that each Wn
Wn
is a large maximal ˆA ! B wave in G −Tn.
Let W0 := ( {a} | a 2 ˆA ). Clearly, W0 is an ˆA ! B wave in G −a⇤,
and it is large and maximal: if not, then G−a⇤has a proper ˆA!B wave,
and adding the trivial path {a⇤} to this wave turns it into a proper A!B
wave (which by assumption does not exist). If a⇤2 B, the existence of
W0 makes a⇤linkable for (G, ˆA, B). So we assume that a⇤/2 B. Now
T0 := {a⇤} and W0 are as desired.
Suppose now that Tn and Wn have been deﬁned, and let An denote
An
the set of last vertices of the paths in Wn. Since Wn is large, An is its
boundary, and since Wn is maximal, Gn := (G−Tn)An!B has no proper
Gn
An ! B wave (Fig. 8.4.4).
...
...
...
n
...
...
a∗
An
B
Tn
tn
ˆ
A
Gn
An+1
Gn+1
Pn
Pn
pn
W
W
Fig. 8.4.4. As Wn is maximal, Gn has no proper An ! B wave

256
8. Inﬁnite Graphs
Note that An does not separate A from B in G: if it did, then
Wn [ {a⇤} would be a small A ! B wave in G, which does not ex-
ist. Hence, G −An contains an A–B path P, which meets Tn because
(Wn, An) is a wave in G −Tn. Let P =: Pn be chosen so that its vertex
Pn
pn following its last vertex tn in Tn is minimal in some ﬁxed enumeration
pn, tn
of V (G).
Let Tn+1 := Tn [tnPnpn be the tree obtained from Tn by adding the
Tn+1
edge tnpn. If Gn −pn has no proper An ! B wave, then Wn+1 := Wn is
large and maximal not only in G −Tn but also in G −Tn+1. If Gn −pn
has a proper An ! B wave, W say, we choose it maximal. Since Gn has
no such wave, W is large by Lemma 8.4.7. Now Wn+1 := Wn + W is a
large maximal An !B wave in G−Tn+1. In either case Tn+1 and Wn+1
are as desired, unless pn 2 B. But then a⇤is linkable for (G, ˆA, B) with
a⇤–B path a⇤Tn+1pn, wave Wn+1 and X = V (Tn+1).
Put T ⇤:= S
n2N Tn. Then the Wn are ˆA!B waves also in G−T ⇤;
let (W⇤, A⇤) be their limit. Our aim is to show that A⇤separates A from
B not only in G −T ⇤but even in G: then (W⇤[ {a⇤} , A⇤) is a small
A ! B wave in G, which by assumption does not exist: a contradiction.
Suppose there exists an A–B path Q in G −A⇤. Let t be its last
vertex in T ⇤. Since T ⇤does not meet B, there is a vertex p following t
on Q. This p is not among the pn, since T ⇤contains those but not p.
Let n be large enough that t 2 Tn and that p precedes pn in our ﬁxed
enumeration of V (G). (As pn 2 Tn+1 −Tn, the pn are pairwise distinct.)
The fact that a⇤TntQ was not chosen as Pn means that its portion
pQ outside Tn meets An, say in a vertex q. Now q /2 A⇤by the choice of Q.
Let W be the path in Wn that joins ˆA to q; this path too avoids A⇤.
But then WqQ contains an ˆA–B path in G −T ⇤avoiding A⇤, which
contradicts the deﬁnition of A⇤.
⇤
The proof of Theorem 8.4.4 for countable G is now complete.
Turning now to matching, let us begin with a simple problem that is
intrinsically inﬁnite. Given two sets A, B and injective functions A ! B
and B !A, is there necessarily also a bijection between A and B? Indeed
there is – this is the famous Cantor-Bernstein theorem from elementary
set theory. Recast in terms of matchings, the proof becomes very simple:
Proposition 8.4.8. Let G be a bipartite graph, with bipartition {A, B}
say. If G contains a matching of A and a matching of B, then G has a
1-factor.
Proof. Let H be the multigraph on V (G) whose edge set is the disjoint
union of the two matchings. (Thus, any edge that lies in both matchings
becomes a double edge in H.) Every vertex in H has degree 1 or 2. In
fact, it is easy to check that every component of H is an even cycle or an
inﬁnite path. Picking every other edge from each component, we obtain
a 1-factor of G.
⇤

8.4 Connectivity and matching
257
The corresponding path problem in non-bipartite graphs, with sets
of disjoint A–B paths instead of matchings, is less trivial. Let us say
that a set P of paths in G covers a set U of vertices if every vertex in U
covers
is an endvertex of a path in P.
Theorem 8.4.9. (Pym 1969)
Let G be a graph, and let A, B ✓V (G). Suppose that G contains two
sets of disjoint A–B paths, one covering A and one covering B. Then G
contains a set of disjoint A–B paths covering A [ B.
Some hints for a proof of Theorem 8.4.9 are included with Exercise 70.
Next, let us see how the standard matching theorems for ﬁnite
graphs – K¨onig, Hall, Tutte, Gallai-Edmonds – extend to inﬁnite graphs.
For locally ﬁnite graphs, they all have straightforward extensions by
compactness; see Exercises 26–29. But there are also very satisfactory
extensions to graphs of arbitrary cardinality. Their proofs form a co-
herent body of theory and are much deeper, so we shall only be able to
state those results and point out how some of them are related. But, as
with Menger’s theorem, the statements themselves are interesting too:
ﬁnding the ‘right’ restatement of a given ﬁnite result to make a substan-
tial inﬁnite theorem is by no means easy, and most of them were found
only as the theory itself developed over the years.
Let us start with bipartite graphs. The following Erd˝os-Menger-type
extension of K¨onig’s theorem (2.1.1) is now a corollary of Theorem 8.4.4:
Theorem 8.4.10. (Aharoni 1984)
Every bipartite graph has a matching, M say, and a vertex cover of its
edge set that consists of exactly one vertex from every edge in M.
What about an inﬁnite version of the marriage theorem (2.1.2)?
The ﬁnite theorem says that a matching exists as soon as every subset
S of the ﬁrst partition class has enough neighbours in the second. But
how do we measure ‘enough’ in an inﬁnite graph? Just as in Menger’s
theorem, comparing cardinalities is not enough (Exercise 27).
However, there is a neat way of rephrasing the marriage condition
for a ﬁnite graph without appealing to cardinalities. Call a subset X of
one partition class matchable to a subset Y of the other if the subgraph
matchable
spanned by X and Y contains a matching of X. Now if S is minimal with
|S| > |N(S)| then, by the marriage theorem, S is ‘larger’ than N(S) also
in the sense that S is not matchable to N(S) but N(S) is matchable to S.
(Indeed, by the minimality of S and the marriage theorem, any S0 ✓S
with |S0| = |S|−1 can be matched to N(S). As |S0| = |S|−1 > |N(S)|,
this matching covers N(S).) Thus, if there is any obstruction S of the
type |S| > |N(S)| to a perfect matching, there is also one where S is
larger than N(S) in this other sense: that S is not matchable to N(S)
but N(S) is matchable to S.
