[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 8. Infinite Graphs
현재 소단원: 8.4 Connectivity and matching (분할 part 2)
직전 소단원: 「8.3 Homogeneous and universal graphs」
[본문]
258
8. Inﬁnite Graphs
Rewriting the marriage condition in this way does indeed yield an
inﬁnite version of Hall’s theorem, which follows from Theorem 8.4.10
just as the marriage theorem follows from K¨onig’s theorem:
Corollary 8.4.11. A bipartite graph with bipartition {A, B} contains
a matching of A unless there is a set S ✓A such that S is not matchable
to N(S) but N(S) is matchable to S.
Proof. Consider a matching M and a cover U as in Theorem 8.4.10.
Then U \ B ◆N(A r U) is matchable to A r U, by the edges of M.
And if A r U is matchable to N(A r U), then adding this matching to
the edges of M incident with A \ U yields a matching of A.
⇤
Applied to a ﬁnite graph, Corollary 8.4.11 implies the marriage
theorem: if N(S) is matchable to S but not conversely, then clearly
|S| > |N(S)|. Similarly, the ﬁnite version of Corollary 8.4.11 implies
the ﬁnite case of the following suﬃcient condition for the existence of a
matching of A:
Theorem 8.4.12. (Milner & Shelah 1974)
A bipartite graph with bipartition {A, B} contains a matching of A if
d(a) > 1 for every a 2 A and d(a) > d(b) for every edge ab with a 2 A.
Let us now turn to non-bipartite graphs. If a ﬁnite graph has a
1-factor, then the set of vertices covered by any partial matching – one
partial
matching
that leaves some vertices unmatched – can be increased by an augment-
ing path, an alternating path whose ﬁrst and last vertex are unmatched
(Ex. 1, Ch. 2). In an inﬁnite graph we no longer insist that augmenting
paths be ﬁnite, as long as they have a ﬁrst vertex. Then, starting at any
augmenting
path
unmatched vertex with an edge of the 1-factor that we are assuming to
exist, we can likewise ﬁnd a unique maximal alternating path that will
either be a ray or end at another unmatched vertex. Switching edges
along this path we can then improve our current matching to increase
the set of matched vertices, just as in a ﬁnite graph.
The existence of an inaugmentable partial matching, therefore, is an
obvious obstruction to the existence of a 1-factor. The following theorem
asserts that this obstruction is the only one:
Theorem 8.4.13. (Ste↵ens 1977)
A countable graph has a 1-factor if and only if for every partial matching
there exists an augmenting path.
Unlike its ﬁnite counterpart, Theorem 8.4.13 is far from trivial: aug-
menting a given matching ‘blindly’ need not lead to a well-deﬁned match-
ing at limit steps, since a given edge may get toggled on and o↵inﬁnitely
often (in which case its status will be undeﬁned at the limit – example?).
We therefore cannot simply ﬁnd the desired 1-factor inductively.

8.4 Connectivity and matching
259
In fact, Theorem 8.4.13 does not extend to uncountable graphs
(Exercise 73).
However, from the obstruction of inaugmentable par-
tial matchings one can derive a Tutte-type condition that does extend.
Given a set S of vertices in a graph G, let us write C0
G−S for the set of
C0
G−S
factor-critical components of G−S, and G0
S for the bipartite graph with
vertex set S [ C0
G−S and edge set { sC | 9 c 2 C : sc 2 E(G) }.
G0
S
Theorem 8.4.14. (Aharoni 1988)
A graph G has a 1-factor if and only if, for every set S ✓V (G), the set
C0
G−S is matchable to S in G0
S.
Applied to a ﬁnite graph, Theorem 8.4.14 implies Tutte’s 1-factor
theorem (2.2.1): if C0
G−S is not matchable to S in G0
S, then by the
marriage theorem there is a subset S0 of S that sends edges to more
than |S0| components in C0
G−S that are also components of G −S0, and
these components are odd because they are factor-critical.
Theorems 8.4.10 and 8.4.14 also imply an inﬁnite version of the
Gallai-Edmonds theorem (2.2.3):
Corollary 8.4.15. Every graph G = (V, E) has a set S of vertices that
is matchable to C0
G−S in G0
S and such that every component of G −S
not in C0
G−S has a 1-factor. Given any such set S, the graph G has a
1-factor if and only if C0
G−S is matchable to S in G0
S.
Proof. Given a pair (S, M) where S ✓V and M is a matching of S
in G0
S, and given another such pair (S0, M 0), write (S, M) 6 (S0, M 0) if
S ✓S0 ✓V r
[
{ V (C) | C 2 C0
G−S }
and M ✓M 0. Since C0
G−S ✓C0
G−S0 for any such S and S0, Zorn’s lemma
implies that there is a maximal such pair (S, M).
S, M
For the ﬁrst statement, we have to show that every component C
of G −S that is not in C0
G−S has a 1-factor. If it does not, then by
Theorem 8.4.14 there is a set T ✓V (C) such that C0
C−T is not match-
able to T in C0
T .
By Corollary 8.4.11, this means that C0
C−T has a
subset C that is not matchable in C0
T to the set T 0 ✓T of its neigh-
bours, while T 0 is matchable to C; let M 0 be such a matching. Then
(S, M) < (S [ T 0, M [ M 0), contradicting the maximality of (S, M).
Of the second statement, only the backward implication is non-
trivial. Our assumptions now are that C0
G−S is matchable to S in G0
S
and vice versa (by the choice of S), so Proposition 8.4.8 yields that G0
S
has a 1-factor. This deﬁnes a matching of S in G that picks one vertex
xC from every component C 2 C0
G−S and leaves the other components
of G −S untouched. Adding to this matching a 1-factor of C −xC for
every C 2 C0
G−S and a 1-factor of every other component of G −S, we
obtain the desired 1-factor of G.
⇤

260
8. Inﬁnite Graphs
Inﬁnite matching theory may seem rather mature and complete as
it stands, but there are still fascinating unsolved problems in the Erd˝os-
Menger spirit concerning related discrete structures, such as partially
ordered sets or hypergraphs. We conclude with one about graphs.
Call an inﬁnite graph G perfect if every induced subgraph H ✓G
has a complete subgraph K of order χ(H), and strongly perfect if K
strongly
perfect
can always be chosen so that it meets every colour class of some χ(H)-
colouring of H. (Exercise 75 gives an example of a perfect graph that is
not strongly perfect.) Call G weakly perfect if the chromatic number of
weakly
perfect
every induced subgraph H ✓G is at most the supremum of the orders
of its complete subgraphs.
Conjecture. (Aharoni & Korman 1993)
Every weakly perfect graph without inﬁnite independent sets of vertices
is strongly perfect.
8.5 Recursive structures
In this section we introduce another tool that is commonly used in inﬁ-
nite graph theory: to deﬁne a class of graphs recursively, so as to be able
later to prove assertions about these graphs by (transﬁnite) induction.
Rather than attempting a systematic treatment of this technique we give
two examples; more can be found in the exercises.
Our ﬁrst example is very simple: it describes the structure of a tree
by recursively pruning away leaves and isolated ends. Let T be any tree,
equipped with a root and the corresponding tree-order on its vertices.
We recursively label the vertices of T by ordinals, as follows. Given an
ordinal ↵, assume that we have decided for every β < ↵which of the
vertices of T to label β, and let T↵be the subgraph of T induced by
the vertices that are still unlabelled. Assign label ↵to every vertex t of
T↵whose up-closure btcT↵= btcT \ T↵in T↵is a chain. The recursion
terminates at the ﬁrst ↵not used to label any vertex; for this ↵we put
T↵=: T ⇤.
T ⇤
For each ↵, the vertices labelled ↵form an up-set in T↵: if btcT↵is
a chain, then so is bt0cT↵for every t0 2 btcT↵. Every T↵, therefore, is a
down-set in T (induction on ↵) and hence connected. Thus, T↵is a tree,
and the set of vertices labelled ↵induces in T↵a disjoint union of paths.
Let us call T recursively prunable if every vertex of T gets labelled
recursively
prunable
in this way, i.e., if T ⇤= ;. We may then be able to prove assertions
about T, or about graphs containing T as a normal spanning tree, by
dealing in turn with those chains as they get deleted.
The following
proposition shows that the recursively prunable trees form a natural
class also in structural terms:
