[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 8. Infinite Graphs
현재 소단원: 8.5 Recursive structures
직전 소단원: 「8.4 Connectivity and matching」
[본문]
260
8. Inﬁnite Graphs
Inﬁnite matching theory may seem rather mature and complete as
it stands, but there are still fascinating unsolved problems in the Erd˝os-
Menger spirit concerning related discrete structures, such as partially
ordered sets or hypergraphs. We conclude with one about graphs.
Call an inﬁnite graph G perfect if every induced subgraph H ✓G
has a complete subgraph K of order χ(H), and strongly perfect if K
strongly
perfect
can always be chosen so that it meets every colour class of some χ(H)-
colouring of H. (Exercise 75 gives an example of a perfect graph that is
not strongly perfect.) Call G weakly perfect if the chromatic number of
weakly
perfect
every induced subgraph H ✓G is at most the supremum of the orders
of its complete subgraphs.
Conjecture. (Aharoni & Korman 1993)
Every weakly perfect graph without inﬁnite independent sets of vertices
is strongly perfect.
8.5 Recursive structures
In this section we introduce another tool that is commonly used in inﬁ-
nite graph theory: to deﬁne a class of graphs recursively, so as to be able
later to prove assertions about these graphs by (transﬁnite) induction.
Rather than attempting a systematic treatment of this technique we give
two examples; more can be found in the exercises.
Our ﬁrst example is very simple: it describes the structure of a tree
by recursively pruning away leaves and isolated ends. Let T be any tree,
equipped with a root and the corresponding tree-order on its vertices.
We recursively label the vertices of T by ordinals, as follows. Given an
ordinal ↵, assume that we have decided for every β < ↵which of the
vertices of T to label β, and let T↵be the subgraph of T induced by
the vertices that are still unlabelled. Assign label ↵to every vertex t of
T↵whose up-closure btcT↵= btcT \ T↵in T↵is a chain. The recursion
terminates at the ﬁrst ↵not used to label any vertex; for this ↵we put
T↵=: T ⇤.
T ⇤
For each ↵, the vertices labelled ↵form an up-set in T↵: if btcT↵is
a chain, then so is bt0cT↵for every t0 2 btcT↵. Every T↵, therefore, is a
down-set in T (induction on ↵) and hence connected. Thus, T↵is a tree,
and the set of vertices labelled ↵induces in T↵a disjoint union of paths.
Let us call T recursively prunable if every vertex of T gets labelled
recursively
prunable
in this way, i.e., if T ⇤= ;. We may then be able to prove assertions
about T, or about graphs containing T as a normal spanning tree, by
dealing in turn with those chains as they get deleted.
The following
proposition shows that the recursively prunable trees form a natural
class also in structural terms:

8.5 Recursive structures
261
Proposition 8.5.1. A rooted tree is recursively prunable if and only if
it contains no subdivision of the inﬁnite binary tree T2 as a subgraph.
Proof. Let T be any rooted tree. Suppose ﬁrst that T is not recursively
prunable, i.e. that T ⇤6= ;. Since no vertex of T ⇤gets labelled when the
recursion terminates, every t 2 T ⇤has two incomparable vertices of T ⇤
above it. As T ⇤is connected, it is now easy to ﬁnd a subdivision of T2
in T ⇤inductively, along the levels of T2.
Conversely, suppose that T contains a subdivision T 0 of T2. We shall
see in a moment that T 0 can be chosen ‘upwards’ in T, that is, in such
a way that the tree-order which T induces on its vertices agrees with its
own tree-order as induced by T2. If this is the case, then every vertex
of T 0 has two incomparable vertices of T 0 above it (in both orders). Hence
there can be no minimal ordinal ↵such that a vertex of T 0 is labelled ↵.
Thus all of T 0 remains unlabelled, and ; 6= T 0 ✓T ⇤as desired.
It remains to show that T 0 can indeed be chosen in this way. Let
T 0 be any subdivision of T2 in T, and let u be minimal in the tree-order
of T among the vertices of T 0. Induction on the levels of the tree bucT 0
shows that 6T 0 and 6T agree on bucT 0: any upper neighbour in T 0 of
a vertex t 2 bucT 0 must lie above t also in T, since the unique lower
neighbour of t in T is either not in T 0 (if t = u), or by induction it is
the unique lower neighbour of t also in T 0. Pick any branch vertex v of
T 0 in bucT 0. Then bvcT 0 is the desired subdivision of T2 in T.
⇤
The charm of the recursive pruning discussed above lies in the fact
that it removes the ‘messy bits’ of a given tree in an automated sort of
way: we do not have to know where they are, but if our given tree con-
tains a ‘clean’ ever-branching subtree, then the recursion will reveal it.
And there is another way of viewing it. We might think of rooted
paths (paths with a ﬁrst vertex, which we take to be the root) as par-
ticularly basic objects, and call them rooted trees of rank 0. We could
then deﬁne rooted trees of higher ordinal rank inductively, taking as the
rooted trees of rank ↵those that do not have any rank β < ↵but in
which it is possible to delete a path starting at the root so as to leave
components that each have some rank < ↵when taken with the induced
tree-order. Then the rooted trees that are assigned a rank in this way
are precisely the recursively prunable ones, and those of rank 6 ↵are
precisely those whose labels do not exceed ↵(Exercise 77).
We now apply the same idea to graphs that are not necessarily trees.
Let us assign rank 0 to all the ﬁnite graphs. Given an ordinal ↵> 0, we
rank
assign rank ↵to every graph G that does not already have a rank β < ↵
and which has a ﬁnite set U of vertices such that every component of
G −U has some rank < ↵.
When disjoint graphs Gi have ranks ↵i < ↵, their union clearly has
a rank of at most ↵; if the union is ﬁnite, it has rank maxi ↵i.
Induction

262
8. Inﬁnite Graphs
on ↵shows that subgraphs of graphs of rank ↵also have a rank of at
most ↵. Conversely, joining ﬁnitely many new vertices to a graph, no
matter how, will not change its rank.
Not every graph has a rank. Indeed, the ray cannot have a rank,
since deleting ﬁnitely many of its vertices always leaves a component
that is also a ray. As subgraphs of graphs with a rank also have a rank,
this means that only rayless graphs can have a rank. But all these do:
Lemma 8.5.2. A graph has a rank if and only if it is rayless.
Proof. Consider a graph G that has no rank. Then one of its compo-
nents, C0 say, has no rank; let v0 be a vertex in C0. Now C0 −v0 has
a component C1 that has no rank; let v1 be a neighbour of v0 in C1.
Continuing inductively, we ﬁnd a ray v0v1 . . . in G.
⇤
Because of Lemma 8.5.2, we call the ranking deﬁned above the rank-
ing of rayless graphs. As an application of this ranking, we now prove
the unfriendly partition conjecture from Section 8.1 for rayless graphs.
Theorem 8.5.3. Every countable rayless graph G has an unfriendly
partition.
Proof. To help with our formal notation, we shall think of a partition
of a set V as a map ⇡: V ! {0, 1}.
We apply induction on the rank
of G. When this is zero then G is ﬁnite, and an unfriendly partition can
be obtained by maximizing the number of edges across the partition.
Suppose now that G has rank ↵> 0, and assume the theorem as true
↵
for graphs of smaller rank.
Let U be a ﬁnite set of vertices in G such that each of the compo-
U
nents C0, C1, . . . of G −U has rank < ↵. Partition U into the set U0
C0, C1, . . .
of vertices that have ﬁnite degree in G, the set U1 of vertices that have
inﬁnitely many neighbours in some Cn, and the set U2 of vertices that
U0, U1, U2
have inﬁnite degree but only ﬁnitely many neighbours in each Cn.
For every n 2 N let Gn := G[U [ V (C0) [ . . . [ V (Cn)]. This is
G0, G1, . . .
a graph of some rank ↵n < ↵, so by induction it has an unfriendly
partition ⇡n. Each of these ⇡n induces a partition of U. Let ⇡U be a
partition of U induced by ⇡n for inﬁnitely many n, say for n0 < n1 < . . ..
Choose n0 large enough that Gn0 contains all the neighbours of vertices
in U0, and the other ni large enough that every vertex in U2 has more
neighbours in Gni −Gni−1 than in Gni−1, for all i > 0. Let ⇡be the
n0, n1, . . .
partition of G deﬁned by letting ⇡(v) := ⇡ni(v) for all v 2 Gni −Gni−1
and all i, where Gn−1 := ;. Note that ⇡|U = ⇡n0|U = ⇡U.
⇡
Let us show that ⇡is unfriendly. We have to check that every vertex
is happy with ⇡, i.e., that it has at least as many neighbours in the oppo-

263
site class under ⇡as in its own.8 To see that a vertex v 2 G−U is happy
with ⇡, let i be minimal such that v 2 Gni and recall that v was happy
with ⇡ni. As both v and its neighbours in G lie in U [ V (Gni −Gni−1),
and ⇡agrees with ⇡ni on this set, v is happy also with ⇡. Vertices in U0
are happy with ⇡, because they were happy with ⇡n0, and ⇡agrees with
⇡n0 on U0 and all its neighbours. Vertices in U1 are also happy. Indeed,
every u 2 U1 has inﬁnitely many neighbours in some Cn, and hence in
some Gni; let i be minimal with this property. Then u has inﬁnitely
many opposite neighbours under ⇡ni in Gni, and hence in Gni −Gni−1.
Since ⇡ni agrees with ⇡on both U and Gni −Gni−1, our vertex u has
inﬁnitely many opposite neighbours also under ⇡. Vertices in U2, ﬁnally,
are happy with every ⇡ni.
By our choice of ni, at least one of their
opposite neighbours under ⇡ni must lie in Gni −Gni−1. Since ⇡ni agrees
with ⇡on both U2 and Gni −Gni−1, this gives every u 2 U2 at least one
opposite neighbour under ⇡in every Gni −Gni−1. Hence u has inﬁnitely
many opposite neighbours under ⇡, which clearly makes it happy.
⇤
8.6 Graphs with ends: the complete picture
In this section we shall develop a deeper understanding of the global
structure of inﬁnite graphs, especially locally ﬁnite ones, that can be
attained only by studying their ends. This structure is intrinsically topo-
logical, because topology best captures our intuition about convergence.9
Our ﬁrst goal will be to make precise our intuitive idea that the
ends of a graph are the ‘points at inﬁnity’ to which its rays converge.
To do so, we shall deﬁne a topological space |G| associated with a graph
G = (V, E, ⌦) and its ends.10
By considering topological versions of
V, E, ⌦
paths, cycles and spanning trees in this space, we shall then be able to
extend to inﬁnite graphs some parts of ﬁnite graph theory that would
not otherwise have inﬁnite counterparts; see the notes for more examples.
Thus, the ends of an inﬁnite graph turn out to be more than a curious
phenomenon: they form an integral part of the picture, without which
it cannot be properly understood.
To build the space |G| formally, we start with the set V [ ⌦. For
every edge e = uv we add a set˚e = (u, v) of continuum many points, mak-
(u, v)
ing these sets ˚e disjoint from each other and from V [⌦. We then choose
for each e some ﬁxed bijection between ˚e and the real interval (0, 1), and
8 It is only by tradition that such partitions are called ‘unfriendly’; our vertices
love them.
9 Only point-set topology is needed for the text. See the exercises for more.
10 The notation of |G| comes from topology and clashes with our notation for the
order of G. But there is little danger of confusion, so we keep both.
8.6 Graphs with ends: the complete picture
