[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 8. Infinite Graphs
현재 소단원: 8.6 Graphs with ends: the complete picture (분할 part 2)
직전 소단원: 「8.5 Recursive structures」
[본문]
8.6 Graphs with ends: the complete picture
271
As a ﬁrst application of our new concepts, let us now extend the
tree packing theorem (2.4.1) of Nash-Williams and Tutte to locally ﬁnite
graphs. Its naive extension, with ordinary spanning trees, fails. Indeed,
for every k 2 N one can construct a 2k-edge-connected locally ﬁnite
graph that is left disconnected by the deletion of the edges in any one
ﬁnite circuit (Exercise 21).
Such a graph will have at least k(` −1)
edges across any vertex partition into ` sets, but it cannot have more
than two edge-disjoint spanning trees: adding an edge of one of these
to another creates a (ﬁnite) fundamental circuit there, whose deletion
would disconnect any third spanning tree.
As soon as we replace ordinary spanning trees with topological ones,
however, Theorem 2.4.1 does extend:
Theorem 8.6.9. The following statements are equivalent for all k 2 N
and connected locally ﬁnite multigraphs G = (V, E):
G = (V, E)
(i) G has k edge-disjoint topological spanning trees.
(ii) For every ﬁnite partition of V, into ` sets say, G has at least
k (` −1) cross-edges.
We begin our proof of Theorem 8.6.9 with a compactness extension
of the ﬁnite theorem. This yields a weaker, ‘ﬁnitary’, statement at the
limit (cf. Lemma 8.6.7):
Lemma 8.6.10. If for every ﬁnite partition of V, into ` sets say, G has
at least k (` −1) cross-edges, then G has k edge-disjoint spanning sub-
multigraphs whose closures in |G| are topologically connected.
Proof. Pick an enumeration v0, v1, . . . of V. For every n 2 N let Gn be
(2.4.1)
(8.1.2)
the ﬁnite multigraph obtained from G by contracting every component of
G−{v0, . . . , vn} to a vertex, deleting any loops but no parallel edges that
arise in the contraction. Then G[v0, . . . , vn] is an induced submultigraph
of Gn. Let Vn denote the set of all k-tuples (H1
n , . . . , Hk
n) of edge-disjoint
connected spanning submultigraphs of Gn.
Since every partition P of V (Gn) induces a partition of V, since G
has enough cross-edges for that partition, and since all these cross-edges
are also cross-edges of P, Theorem 2.4.1 implies that Vn 6= ;. As every
(H1
n , . . . , Hk
n) 2 Vn induces an element (H1
n−1, . . . , Hk
n−1) of Vn−1, the
inﬁnity lemma (8.1.2), yields a sequence (H1
n , . . . , Hk
n)n2N of k-tuples,
one from each Vn, with a limit (H1, . . . , Hk) deﬁned by the nested unions
Hi :=
[
n2N
Hi
n[v0, . . . , vn] .
These Hi are edge-disjoint for distinct i (because the Hi
n are), but
they need not be connected. To show that they have connected closures,

272
8. Inﬁnite Graphs
it suﬃces by Lemma 8.6.7 to show that each of them has an edge in every
ﬁnite cut F of G. Given F, choose n large enough that all the edges of
F lie in G[v0, . . . , vn]. Then F is also a cut of Gn. Now consider the
k-tuple (H1
n , . . . , Hk
n) which the inﬁnity lemma picked from Vn. Each of
these Hi
n is a connected spanning submultigraph of Gn , so it contains an
edge from F. But Hi
n agrees with Hi on {v0, . . . , vn}, so Hi too contains
this edge from F.
⇤
Lemma 8.6.11. Every connected standard subspace of |G| that con-
tains V also contains a topological spanning tree of G.
Proof. Let X be a connected standard subspace of |G| containing V.
Then G too must be connected, so it is countable. Let e0, e1, . . . be an
enumeration of E(X), and consider these edges in turn. Starting with
X0 := X, deﬁne Xn+1 := Xn r˚en if this keeps Xn+1 connected; if not,
put Xn+1 := Xn. Finally, let T := T
n2N Xn.
Since T is closed and contains V, it is still a standard subspace. And
T has an edge in every ﬁnite cut of G, because X does and its last edge
in that cut will never be deleted. So T is connected, by Lemma 8.6.7.
But T contains no circle: that would contain an edge, which should have
got deleted since deleting an edge from a circle cannot destroy connect-
edness.
⇤
Proof of Theorem 8.6.9. The implication (ii)!(i) follows from our
two lemmas. For (i)!(ii), let G have edge-disjoint topological spanning
trees T1, . . . , Tk, and consider a partition P of V into ` sets. If there are
inﬁnitely many cross-edges, there is nothing to show; so we assume there
are only ﬁnitely many. For each i 2 {1, . . . , k}, let T 0
i be the multigraph
of order ` which the edges of Ti induce on P.
To establish that G has at least k(` −1) cross-edges, we show that
the multigraphs T 0
i are connected. If not, then some T 0
i has a vertex
partition crossed by no edge of Ti. This partition induces a cut of G
that contains no edge of Ti. By our assumption that G has only ﬁnitely
many cross-edges, this cut is ﬁnite. By Lemma 8.6.7, this contradicts
the connectedness of Ti.
⇤
8.7 The topological cycle space
As a more comprehensive application of our new theory, let us now look
(1.9)
at how the cycle space theory of ﬁnite graphs extends to locally ﬁnite
graphs G = (V, E) with inﬁnite circuits and topological spanning trees.
G = (V, E)
Every two points of a topological spanning tree T are joined by a
unique arc in T: existence follows from Lemma 8.6.5, while uniqueness
is proved as for ﬁnite graphs. Adding a new edge e to T therefore creates
