[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 8. Infinite Graphs
현재 소단원: 8.7 The topological cycle space
직전 소단원: 「8.6 Graphs with ends: the complete picture」
[본문]
272
8. Inﬁnite Graphs
it suﬃces by Lemma 8.6.7 to show that each of them has an edge in every
ﬁnite cut F of G. Given F, choose n large enough that all the edges of
F lie in G[v0, . . . , vn]. Then F is also a cut of Gn. Now consider the
k-tuple (H1
n , . . . , Hk
n) which the inﬁnity lemma picked from Vn. Each of
these Hi
n is a connected spanning submultigraph of Gn , so it contains an
edge from F. But Hi
n agrees with Hi on {v0, . . . , vn}, so Hi too contains
this edge from F.
⇤
Lemma 8.6.11. Every connected standard subspace of |G| that con-
tains V also contains a topological spanning tree of G.
Proof. Let X be a connected standard subspace of |G| containing V.
Then G too must be connected, so it is countable. Let e0, e1, . . . be an
enumeration of E(X), and consider these edges in turn. Starting with
X0 := X, deﬁne Xn+1 := Xn r˚en if this keeps Xn+1 connected; if not,
put Xn+1 := Xn. Finally, let T := T
n2N Xn.
Since T is closed and contains V, it is still a standard subspace. And
T has an edge in every ﬁnite cut of G, because X does and its last edge
in that cut will never be deleted. So T is connected, by Lemma 8.6.7.
But T contains no circle: that would contain an edge, which should have
got deleted since deleting an edge from a circle cannot destroy connect-
edness.
⇤
Proof of Theorem 8.6.9. The implication (ii)!(i) follows from our
two lemmas. For (i)!(ii), let G have edge-disjoint topological spanning
trees T1, . . . , Tk, and consider a partition P of V into ` sets. If there are
inﬁnitely many cross-edges, there is nothing to show; so we assume there
are only ﬁnitely many. For each i 2 {1, . . . , k}, let T 0
i be the multigraph
of order ` which the edges of Ti induce on P.
To establish that G has at least k(` −1) cross-edges, we show that
the multigraphs T 0
i are connected. If not, then some T 0
i has a vertex
partition crossed by no edge of Ti. This partition induces a cut of G
that contains no edge of Ti. By our assumption that G has only ﬁnitely
many cross-edges, this cut is ﬁnite. By Lemma 8.6.7, this contradicts
the connectedness of Ti.
⇤
8.7 The topological cycle space
As a more comprehensive application of our new theory, let us now look
(1.9)
at how the cycle space theory of ﬁnite graphs extends to locally ﬁnite
graphs G = (V, E) with inﬁnite circuits and topological spanning trees.
G = (V, E)
Every two points of a topological spanning tree T are joined by a
unique arc in T: existence follows from Lemma 8.6.5, while uniqueness
is proved as for ﬁnite graphs. Adding a new edge e to T therefore creates

8.7 The topological cycle space
273
a unique circle in T [ e; its edges form the fundamental circuit Ce of e fundamental
circuit Ce
with respect to T. Note that Ce can be inﬁnite.
Similarly, for every edge f 2 E(T) the space T r ˚
f has exactly two
arc-components; the set of edges between these is the fundamental cut Df
fundamental
cut Df
of T. Since the two arc-components of T r ˚
f are closed (Lemma 8.6.6)
but disjoint, Lemma 8.6.3 (ii) implies that Df is ﬁnite.
As in ﬁnite graphs, we have e 2 Df if and only if f 2 Ce, for all
f 2 E(T) and e 2 E r E(T). Topological spanning trees that are the
closure of a normal spanning tree, as in Lemma 8.6.8, are particularly
(8.6.8)
useful in this context: their fundamental circuits and cuts are both ﬁnite.
For locally ﬁnite graphs there will be two cycle spaces: the usual
‘ﬁnitary’ one from Chapter 1.9, and a new ‘topological’ one based on
topological circuits. The former will be a subspace of the latter, much
as the space of all ﬁnite cuts is a subspace of the space of all cuts. These
four spaces are cross-related by matroid duality in a surprising way; see
the notes and Exercise 123.
Call a family (Di)i2I of subsets of E thin if no edge lies in Di for
thin sum
inﬁnitely many i. Let the thin sum P
i2I Di of this family be the set of
all edges that lie in Di for an odd number of indices i. The topological
cycle space C(G) of G is the subspace of its edge space E(G) consisting
topological
cycle space
C(G)
of all thin sums of circuits.
We say that a given set Z of circuits generates C(G) if every element
of C(G) is a thin sum of elements of Z. For example, the topological
generates
cycle space of the ladder in Figure 8.1.3 can be generated by all its
squares (the 4-element circuits), or by the inﬁnite circuit consisting of
all horizontal edges and all squares but one. Similarly, the ‘wild circuit’
of Figure 8.6.1 is the thin sum of all the ﬁnite face boundaries of that
graph, which thus generate it.
Let us use Cﬁn(G) to denote the ﬁnitary cycle space of G as de-
ﬁned in Chapter 1.9 : the (ﬁnite) sums of its ﬁnite circuits.
Clearly
ﬁnitary
cycle space
Cﬁn(G)
Cﬁn(G) ✓C(G). We shall see later that Cﬁn(G) contains all the ﬁnite
elements of C(G), but this is not obvious from the deﬁnitions; see Exer-
cise 120. When G is ﬁnite, however, clearly Cﬁn(G) = C(G).
As shown in Chapter 1.9, a ﬁnite set of edges of G lies in Cﬁn(G) if
and only if it meets every cut of G evenly, and the fundamental circuits of
any ordinary spanning tree generate Cﬁn(G) by ﬁnite sums: just copy the
proofs given there. For C(G) we have the following topological analogue:
Theorem 8.7.1. The following statements are equivalent for every
set D of edges of a locally ﬁnite connected graph G:
(i) D 2 C(G);
(ii) D meets every ﬁnite cut F of G in an even number of edges;
(iii) D is a thin sum of fundamental circuits of any topological span-
ning tree of G.

274
8. Inﬁnite Graphs
Proof.
The implication (iii)!(i) holds by deﬁnition of C(G) and the
(8.2.4)
(8.6.3)
(8.6.7)
fact that G has a topological spanning tree (Lemma 8.6.11).
Let us prove (i)!(ii). By assumption, D is a thin sum of circuits.
Only ﬁnitely many of these can meet F, so it suﬃces to show that every
circuit meets F evenly. This follows from Lemma 8.6.3 (i): given a circle
C in |G|, the segments of C between its edges in F (if any) are arcs whose
vertices all lie on the same side of the cut F. These sides alternate as
we follow C round. Therefore, there is an even number of such arcs, and
hence also of edges that C has in F.
It remains to prove (ii)!(iii). Write Ce for the fundamental circuit
of an edge e /2 E(T), and Df for the fundamental cut of an edge f 2 E(T).
Recall that, by Lemma 8.6.3 (ii), these Df are ﬁnite cuts. We show that
D =
X
e2DrE(T )
Ce .
(⇤)
This sum is well deﬁned: since f 2 Ce , e 2 Df and fundamental
cuts are ﬁnite, the Ce in this sum form a thin family. To prove (⇤) we
show that D0 := D + P
e2DrE(T ) Ce = ;.
Note ﬁrst that D0 ✓E(T): any chord of T that lies in D also lies in
exactly one of the Ce in the sum. Hence any f 2 D0 is the unique edge
of T, and hence of D0, in the ﬁnite cut Df, giving |D0 \ Df| = 1. This
is a contradiction, since D meets Df evenly by (ii), and every Ce does
by Lemma 8.6.3.
⇤
Corollary 8.7.2. C(G) is generated by ﬁnite circuits.
Proof. Apply Theorem 8.7.1 with the closure of a normal spanning tree,
(8.2.4)
which is a topological spanning tree by Lemma 8.6.8.
⇤
Our second aim in this section is to prove the analogue of Proposi-
tion 1.9.1 (ii) for the topological cycle space: that its elements D are not
only thin sums but even disjoint unions of circuits. For ﬁnite graphs, it
was easy to ﬁnd these circuits greedily: we would ‘follow the edges of D
round’ until a circuit was found, delete it, and repeat.
This will still be our overall strategy when G is inﬁnite. But it is
no longer straightforward now to isolate a single circuit from D. For
example, without using our knowledge that the edge set D of the wild
circle in the graph G of Figure 8.6.1 is a circuit, we can see at once that
it must lie in C(G): it is the thin sum of all the ﬁnite circuits bounding
a face. Our proof must therefore be able to ‘decompose’ D into disjoint
circuits. Since D itself is the only circuit contained in D, the proof thus
has to reconstruct the complicated wild circle just from the information
that D 2 C(G). And it has to do so generically, without appealing to the
special structure of this particular graph.

8.7 The topological cycle space
275
Theorem 8.7.3. For every locally ﬁnite graph G, every element of C(G)
is a disjoint union of circuits.
Proof.
We may assume that G is connected, and hence countable. Let
(1.9.1)
(8.1.2)
(8.6.4)
D 2 C(G) be given, and enumerate its edges. We inductively construct a
sequence of disjoint circuits C ✓D each containing the smallest edge in
our enumeration of D that is not yet contained in the circuits constructed
before. Then all these circuits will form the desired partition of D.
Suppose we have already constructed ﬁnitely many disjoint circuits
all contained in D. Deleting these edges from D leaves a set D0 of edges
D0, e
that is again in C(G); let e be its smallest edge in our enumeration of D.
We shall ﬁnd a topological path ⇡between the endvertices of e in the
standard subspace that D0 r {e} spans in |G|. By Lemma 8.6.4, the
image of ⇡will contain an arc A between these vertices, and A [ e will
be the circle deﬁning our next circuit.
Enumerate the vertices of G as v0, v1, . . ., with e = v0v1.
Let
e = v0v1
Sn := {v0, . . . , vn}. For each n > 1, let Gn be the ﬁnite multigraph
obtained from G by contracting every component of G −Sn to a ver-
tex, deleting any loops but keeping parallel edges that arise in the
contraction.
Note that both V (Gn) and E(Gn) are ﬁnite, and that
Gn
G[Sn] ✓Gn. Let v0
n denote the vertex of Gn−1 −Sn−1 whose branch
set Vn contains vn.
v0
n , Vn
We may think of E(Gn) as a subset of E(G). Then the cuts of Gn
are also cuts of G. By Theorem 8.7.1, D0 meets these evenly; in particu-
lar, every vertex of Gn is incident with an even number of edges in D0.
Hence D0 \E(Gn) 2 C(Gn), by Proposition 1.9.1, so Gn contains a cycle
through e that has all its edges in D0. Let Pn be the unique v0–v1 walk
in this cycle that does not contain e and does not repeat any vertices.
Let Vn be the set of all v0–v1 walks in Gn −e in which none of the
vertices v0, . . . , vn, and hence no edge, occurs more than once. Then
Pn 2 Vn 6= ;, and Vn is ﬁnite. Every walk W 2 Vn with n > 2 induces a
walk W 0 2 Vn−1 consisting of the edges that W has in Gn−1, traversed
in the same order and direction.14 Thus, W 0 arises from W by replacing
any subwalk of vertices and edges not in Gn−1 with v0
n. The vertices of
any such subwalk of W will be vn or vertices of Gn −Sn whose branch
set is contained in Vn. By the inﬁnity lemma, there exists a choice of
walks Wn 2 Vn such that W 0
n = Wn−1 for all n > 2.
Our next aim is to turn these walks Wn into topological paths
⇡n: [0, 1] ! |Gn| that traverse them from v0 to v1 and reﬂect their com-
patibility. We shall deﬁne these ⇡n for n = 1, 2, . . . in turn, as follows.
For n = 1, note that W1 has exactly two edges: at least two, be-
cause e has no parallel edge, and at most two, because every edge of G1
14 These are well deﬁned: every edge e 2 W that is an edge of Gn−1 has at least
one endvertex in Sn−1, which either precedes it in W or follows it. In W 0, this vertex
will likewise precede or follow e, respectively.

276
8. Inﬁnite Graphs
is adjacent to either v0 or v1. Let ⇡1 map [0, 1
3] onto the ﬁrst edge, [ 1
3, 2
3]
to the unique inner vertex of W1, and [ 2
3, 1] onto the second edge.
For n > 2, assume inductively that ⇡n−1 traverses the edges of Wn−1
in their given order and direction, and that ⇡n−1 ‘pauses’ at each vertex
v 2 Gn−1 −Sn−1 on Wn−1 for a non-singleton closed interval I ✓[0, 1],
mapping I constantly to that vertex. (Thus, if Wn−1 visits v ﬁve times,
then ⇡−1
n−1(v) is a disjoint union of ﬁve such intervals.) We start our de-
ﬁnition of ⇡n by letting ⇡n(λ) := ⇡n−1(λ) for all λ with ⇡n−1(λ) 2 |Gn|.
Every other λ 2 [0, 1] satisﬁes ⇡n−1(λ) = v0
n. These λ form a dis-
joint union of closed intervals, one for every occurrence of v0
n on Wn−1.
Recall that Wn arises from Wn−1 by replacing each occurrence of v0
n by a
subwalk of Wn whose vertices are either vn or vertices of Gn −Sn whose
branch set is contained in Vn. For every occurrence of v0
n on Wn−1, let
⇡n on the corresponding interval I with ⇡n−1(I) = {v0
n} traverse this
subwalk of Wn, once more pausing for a non-singleton interval at any
vertex that this subwalk has in Gn −Sn.
These maps ⇡n tend to a limit ⇡: [0, 1]!|G|, deﬁned as follows. Let
λ 2 [0, 1] be given. If ⇡n(λ) 2 |G| for some n, then ⇡m(λ) = ⇡n(λ) for
all m > n, and we let ⇡(λ) := ⇡n(λ). Otherwise ⇡n(λ) 2 V (Gn)rSn for
all n; let Un be the branch set of this vertex un := ⇡n(λ) of Gn in G.
By our inductive construction of the maps ⇡n, we have U1 ◆U2 ◆. . . .
Since Un spans a component Cn = Cn(λ) of G −Sn, we can ﬁnd a ray
in G that has a tail in each Cn; let ⇡(λ) be the end ! of this ray. Note
that !, and hence ⇡(λ), is well deﬁned: every end !0 6= ! is separated
from ! by some Sn, and then fails to have a ray in Cn.
For a proof that ⇡is our desired topological v0–v1 path in |G|, we
need to check continuity at every λ. If ⇡(λ) = ⇡n(λ) for some n, then
⇡agrees with ⇡n also in a small neighbourhood of λ, so this follows
from the continuity of ⇡n. Otherwise ⇡(λ) is an end, ! say. Then !
has a neighbourhood basis in |G| consisting of open sets ˆC✏(Sn, !). Here
C(Sn, !) is the component Cn(λ) deﬁned earlier, since ! has a ray in it.
Now λ is an inner point of an interval I ✓[0, 1] which ⇡n maps to
the vertex un = ⇡n(λ). By construction, ⇡(I) ✓Cn(λ) ✓ˆC✏(Sn, !),
completing our continuity proof for ⇡.
⇤
Note that in the special case of Theorem 8.7.3 where the cycle space
element considered is the entire edge set of G, Theorem 8.4.2 gives the
stronger result that E(G) is a disjoint union of ﬁnite circuits.
Corollary 8.7.4. C(G) is closed under inﬁnite thin sums.
Proof. Consider a thin sum P
i2I Di of elements of C(G). By Theorem
8.7.3, each Di is a disjoint union of circuits. Together, these form a thin
family, whose sum lies in C(G) and equals P
i2I Di.
⇤

277
8.8 Inﬁnite graphs as limits of ﬁnite ones
In the last section we saw how the space |G|, for a locally ﬁnite graph G,
seems to appear as a ‘limit’ of the ﬁnite minors Gn of G obtained by
contracting the components left on deleting its ﬁrst n vertices. We now
make this relationship between |G| and the Gn more formal. Clarifying
this can help a lot with transferring theorems for ﬁnite graphs to inﬁnite
ones – which, after all, is the idea behind considering |G| in the ﬁrst place.
Let (P, 6) be a directed partially ordered set, one such that for all
directed
p, q there exists an r such that p 6 r and q 6 r. A subset Q ✓P is
coﬁnal in P if for every p 2 P there exists some q 2 Q with p 6 q.
coﬁnal
For every p 2 P let Xp be a compact Hausdor↵topological space;
later, these will represent ﬁnite graphs. Assume that we have continuous
maps fqp: Xq ! Xp for all q > p, which are compatible in that, whenever
inverse
system
r > q > p, we have fqp ◦frq = frp. The family X = ( Xp | p 2 P ),
together with these bonding maps fqp, is called an inverse system.
bonding
maps
The set X of all x = ( xp | p 2 P ) with xp 2 Xp and fqp(xq) = xp
for all p < q in P is the inverse limit X = lim
 −X of X. We give it the inverse limit
subspace topology from the product space Q
p2P Xp which, like the Xp,
is Hausdor↵and compact by Tychono↵’s theorem.
The space X = lim
 −X is the intersection, over all q 2 P, of the sets
X<q of all ( xp | p 2 P ) 2 Q
p Xp that satisfy fqp(xq) = xp for all p < q.
Using the fact that the Xp are Hausdor↵and the maps fqp are contin-
uous, one can show that these subsets X<q of Q
p Xp are closed. Thus,
X = T
q 2P X<q is closed in the compact space Q
p Xp, and therefore
compact.
As P is directed, the sets X<q have the ﬁnite intersection property,
as long as the Xp are non-empty. Then X = T
q X<q is also non-empty:
Lemma 8.8.1. X = lim
 −( Xp | p 2 P ) is a compact Hausdor↵space.
It is non-empty if Xp 6= ; for all p 2 P.
⇤
Given a graph G = (V, E, ⌦), consider as P = P(G) the set of all
G, V, E, ⌦
ﬁnite partitions of V with only ﬁnitely many cross-edges. Letting p 6 q
P(G), P
whenever q reﬁnes p makes P into a directed partially ordered set. For
each p, let G/p be the ﬁnite multigraph on p whose edges are the cross-
G/p
edges of p.15 The vertices of G/p that are non-singleton partition classes
are its dummy vertices. The other vertices of G/p, those of the form {v},
dummy
vertices
we consider to be vertices of G and refer to them as v.
On the compact spaces Xp := |G/p| we have compatible quotient
maps fqp: Xq !Xp for q > p which send the vertices of G/q to the vertices
Xp, fqp
of G/p that contain them as subsets; which are the identity on the edges
15 If the partition classes U 2 p are connected in G, then G/p is the minor of G
obtained by contracting them. But we do not require them to be connected.
8.8 Inﬁnite graphs as limits of ﬁnite ones
