[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 8. Infinite Graphs
현재 소단원: 8.ex Exercises (분할 part 1)
직전 소단원: 「8.8 Infinite graphs as limits of finite ones」
[연습문제]
280
8. Inﬁnite Graphs
them for all p in some coﬁnal Q ✓P. For example, we can construct
spanning trees inductively in all the Gn by expanding a dummy vertex
in the tree Tn ✓Gn to a star in Tn+1 ✓Gn+1. Then our given bonding
maps Xpn ! Xpm will map the subspace X0
pn induced by Tn to that
induced by Tm, and these X0
pn will have a topological spanning tree in
X = |G| as their inverse limit. This construction is possible only because
the partition classes of the pn are connected in G; we could not perform
it on all of P(G).
Arcs and circles in |G|, or in a standard subspace, can be obtained
easily by applying the following lifting lemma with Y = [0, 1] or Y = S1.
Let ( Xp | p 2 P ) be any inverse system of compact spaces, with bonding
maps fqp say, and let X be its inverse limit. Let Y be a topological space
with continuous compatible maps gp: Y ! Xp: maps that commute with
compatible
maps
the fqp in that gp = fqp ◦gq whenever p < q. Let us call the family
( gp | p 2 P ) eventually injective if for all distinct y, y0 2 Y there exists
some p 2 P with gp(y) 6= gp(y0).
Lemma 8.8.4. There is a unique continuous map g: Y ! X that com-
lifting
lemma
mutes with the projections fp: X ! Xp in that gp = fp ◦g for all p 2 P.
If the gp are eventually injective, then g is injective.
⇤
For example, suppose we wish to ﬁnd an arc in X between some
points x and y.
We can ﬁnd a topological x–y path g: [0, 1] ! X by
ﬁnding topological fp(x)–fp(y) paths gp: [0, 1] ! Xp that commute with
the fqp. If we can make these gp eventually injective, then g will be
injective, and its image will be the desired arc.
Similarly, if we can ﬁnd compatible circles gp: S1 ! Xp that are
eventually injective, whose images contain all the vertices of G/p, and
which commute with the fqp, then g will deﬁne a Hamilton circle of G,
Hamilton
circle
a circle in |G| that traverses every vertex.
Exercises
1.−Show that a connected graph is countable if all its vertices have count-
able degrees.
2.−Given countably many sequences σi = si
1, si
2, . . . (i 2 N) of natural num-
bers, ﬁnd one sequence σ = s1, s2, . . . that beats every σi eventually,
i.e. such that for every i there exists an n(i) such that sn > si
n for all
n > n(i).
3.−Can a countable set have uncountably many subsets whose intersections
have ﬁnitely bounded size?
4.−Let T be an inﬁnite rooted tree.
Show that every ray in T has an
increasing tail, that is, a tail whose sequence of vertices increases in the
tree-order associated with T and its root.

Exercises
281
5.−Let G be an inﬁnite graph and A, B ✓V (G). Show that if no ﬁnite set
of vertices separates A from B in G, then G contains an inﬁnite set of
disjoint A–B paths.
6.−In Proposition 8.1.1, the existence of a spanning tree was proved using
Zorn’s lemma ‘from below’, to ﬁnd a maximal acyclic subgraph. For
ﬁnite graphs, one can also use induction ‘from above’, to ﬁnd a minimal
spanning connected subgraph. What happens if we apply Zorn’s lemma
‘from above’ to ﬁnd such a subgraph?
For the next two exercises it may help to consider the cycle space of the given
graph, deﬁned as for ﬁnite graphs in Chapter 1.9.
7.−Show that if a graph has a spanning tree with inﬁnitely many chords
then all its spanning trees have inﬁnitely many chords.
8.
Show that if a graph contains inﬁnitely many distinct cycles then it
contains inﬁnitely many edge-disjoint cycles.
9.
Let G be a countable inﬁnitely connected graph. Show that G has,
for every k 2 N, an inﬁnitely connected spanning subgraph of girth at
least k.
10.
Construct, for any given k 2 N, a planar k-connected graph. Can you
construct one whose girth is also at least k?
Can you construct an
inﬁnitely connected planar graph?
11.
Theorem 8.1.3 implies that there exists an N!N function fχ such that,
for every k 2 N, every inﬁnite graph of chromatic number at least fχ(k)
has a ﬁnite subgraph of chromatic number at least k. (E.g., let fχ be
the identity on N.) Find similar functions fδ and ffor the minimum
degree and connectivity, or show that no such functions exist.
12.
Let k be an integer and > @1 a regular cardinal. Show that every k-
connected graph of order contains TKk,as a topological minor.
13.
Let k 2 N, and let a, b be two vertices in a graph G.
(i) Show that there are only ﬁnitely many minimal a–b separators
of order k, and only ﬁnitely many minimal a–b cuts of order k.
(A cut is an a– b cut if it separates a from b.)
(ii) Deduce that every edge of G lies in only ﬁnitely many bonds of
k edges.
14.+ Extend Exercise 42 of Chapter 1 to inﬁnite graphs.
15.
Use the inﬁnity lemma to show that a rayless connected graph of min-
imum degree d has a ﬁnite subgraph of minimum degree d.
16.
A theorem of Halin says that every graph of chromatic number ↵> @0
contains a TKβ for every cardinal β < ↵. Prove this for ↵= @0.
17.−Prove Theorem 8.1.3 for arbitrary graphs using the generalized inﬁnity
lemma from Appendix A.

282
8. Inﬁnite Graphs
18.
Give a proof of Theorem 8.1.3 for countable graphs that is based on the
fact that, in this case, the topological space X deﬁned in the third proof
of the theorem is sequentially compact. (Thus, every inﬁnite sequence
of points in X has a convergent subsequence: there is an x 2 X such
that every neighbourhood of x contains a tail of the subsequence.)
19.−Extend Nash-Williams’s tree covering theorem (2.4.3) to inﬁnite graphs.
20.+ Extend the packing-covering theorem (2.4.4) to inﬁnite graphs.
21.+ For every k 2 N, construct a k-connected locally ﬁnite graph such that
the deletion of the edge set of any cycle disconnects that graph. Deduce
that the tree packing theorem (2.4.1) of Nash-Williams and Tutte fails
for inﬁnite graphs.
(Hint.
Start with a k-connected ﬁnite graph G0.
If G0 has a cycle
C such that deleting E(C) does not disconnect G0, graft some more
copies of G0 on to E(C) to give C that property. Continue inductively.)
22.
Derive the generalized inﬁnity lemma and the compactness principle in
Appendix A from each other.
23.
In the text, the unfriendly partition conjecture is proved for locally
ﬁnite graphs, using the inﬁnity lemma.
(i) Give an alternative proof using the compactness principle from
Appendix A.
(ii) The proof in the text, by the inﬁnity lemma, required a modiﬁca-
tion of the statement. Is this still necessary? Which step in the
proof using the compactness principle reﬂects the requirement
in the inﬁnity lemma that every admissible partial solution must
induce an admissible solution on a smaller substructure? Where
is the local ﬁniteness used?
24.
(i) Prove the unfriendly partition conjecture for countable graphs with
all degrees inﬁnite.
(ii) Can you adapt the proof to cover also those countable graphs that
have ﬁnitely many vertices of ﬁnite degree?
25.
Rephrase Gallai’s partition theorem of Exercise 55, Ch. 1, in terms of
degrees, and extend the equivalent version to locally ﬁnite graphs.
26.
Prove Theorem 8.4.10 for locally ﬁnite graphs. Does your proof extend
to arbitrary countable graphs?
27.
Extend the marriage theorem to locally ﬁnite graphs, but show that it
fails for countable graphs with inﬁnite degrees.
28.
Show that every locally ﬁnite factor-critical graph is ﬁnite.
29.+ Show that a locally ﬁnite graph G has a 1-factor if and only if, for
every ﬁnite set S ✓V (G), the graph G −S has at most |S| odd (ﬁnite)
components. Find a counterexample that is not locally ﬁnite.
30.+ Extend Kuratowski’s theorem to countable graphs.

Exercises
283
31.−A vertex v 2 G is said to dominate an end ! of G if any of the following
three assertions holds; show that they are equivalent.
(i) For some ray R 2 ! there is an inﬁnite v–(R −v) fan in G.
(ii) For every ray R 2 ! there is an inﬁnite v–(R −v) fan in G.
(iii) No ﬁnite subset of V (G −v) separates v from a ray in !.
32.
Show that a graph G contains a TK@0 if and only if some end of G is
dominated by inﬁnitely many vertices.
33.
Let G be a ﬁnitely separable graph, one in which any two vertices can
be separated by ﬁnitely many edges.
(i) Show that any two ends in G that cannot be separated by ﬁnitely
many edges are dominated by a common vertex.
(ii) Is the assumption of ﬁnite separability necessary for (i) to hold?
34.
Construct a countable graph with uncountably many thick ends. Can
you ﬁnd a locally ﬁnite such graph?
35.
Show that a locally ﬁnite connected vertex-transitive graph has exactly
0, 1, 2 or inﬁnitely many ends.
36.+ Show that the automorphisms of a graph G = (V, E) act naturally on
its ends, i.e., that every automorphism σ: V ! V can be extended to a
map σ: ⌦(G) ! ⌦(G) such that σ(R) 2 σ(!) whenever R is a ray in an
end !. Prove that, if G is connected, every automorphism σ of G ﬁxes
a ﬁnite set of vertices or an end. If σ ﬁxes no ﬁnite set of vertices, can
it ﬁx more than one end? More than two?
37.−Show that a locally ﬁnite spanning tree of a graph G contains a ray
from every end of G.
38.
A ray in a graph follows another ray if the two have inﬁnitely many
vertices in common. Show that if T is a normal spanning tree of G
then every ray of G follows a unique normal ray of T.
39.
Use normal spanning trees to show that a countable connected graph
has either countably many or continuum many ends.
40.
Show that the following assertions are equivalent for connected count-
able graphs G.
(i) G has a locally ﬁnite spanning tree.
(ii) For no ﬁnite separator X ✓V (G) in G does G−X have inﬁnitely
many components.
41.
Show that every (countable) planar 3-connected graph has a locally
ﬁnite spanning tree.
42.
Prove the following inﬁnite version of the Erd˝os-P´osa theorem: an in-
ﬁnite graph G either contains inﬁnitely many disjoint cycles or it has a
ﬁnite set Z of vertices such that G −Z is a forest.

284
8. Inﬁnite Graphs
43.
Let G be a connected graph. Call a set U ✓V (G) dispersed if every
ray in G can be separated from U by a ﬁnite set of vertices. (In the
topology of Section 8.6, these are precisely the closed subsets of V (G).)
(i) Prove that G has a normal spanning tree if and only if V (G) is
a countable union of dispersed sets. Show that in this case we
can choose any vertex of G as the normal spanning tree’s root.
(ii) Deduce that if G has a normal spanning tree then so does every
connected minor of G.
44.+ Show that a connected graph G has a normal spanning tree if it does
not contain a subdivision of a fat K@0, one in which every edge has
been replaced by uncountably many parallel edges.
(Hint. Apply induction on |G|. Given G, construct an increasing se-
quence ( Gβ | β < ↵) of smaller graphs exhausting G so that the endver-
tices of any Gβ-path in G are joined in Gβ by inﬁnitely many indepen-
dent paths and in G by uncountably many independent paths. Combine
suitable normal spanning trees of the components of Gβ+1 −Gβ with
the inductively given normal spanning tree of Gβ to form a normal
spanning tree of Gβ+1.)
45.+ Prove Theorem 8.2.5 (ii).
46.
(i) Prove that if a given end of a graph contains k disjoint rays for every
k 2 N then it contains inﬁnitely many disjoint rays.
(ii)+ Prove that if a given end of a graph contains k edge-disjoint rays
for every k 2 N then it contains inﬁnitely many edge-disjoint rays.
47.
Prove that if a graph contains k disjoint double rays for every k 2 N
then it contains inﬁnitely many disjoint double rays.
48.
Show that, in the ubiquity conjecture, the host graphs G considered
can be assumed to be locally ﬁnite too.
49.
Show that the modiﬁed comb below is not ubiquitous with respect to
the subgraph relation. Does it become ubiquitous if we delete its 3-star
on the left?
50.
Show that every locally ﬁnite tree T is minor-ubiquitous in countable
graphs, by proving and combining the following statements:
(i)
The N ⇥N grid H satisﬁes @0H 4 H.
(ii)
T 4 H.
(iii)+ Assuming that nT 4 G for all n 2 N, show that @0T 4 G unless
G has a thick end.
51.
Imitate the proof of Theorem 8.2.6 to ﬁnd a function f: N!N such that
whenever an end ! of a graph G contains f(k) disjoint rays, G contains
a subdivision of the k ⇥N hexagonal grid whose rays all belong to !.

Exercises
285
52.
Show that there is no universal locally ﬁnite connected graph for the
subgraph relation.
53.
Construct a universal locally ﬁnite connected graph for the minor rela-
tion. Is there one for the topological minor relation?
54.−Show that each of the following operations performed on the Rado
graph R leaves a graph isomorphic to R:
(i) taking the complement, i.e. changing all edges into non-edges
and vice versa;
(ii) deleting ﬁnitely many vertices;
(iii) changing ﬁnitely many edges into non-edges or vice versa;
(iv) changing all the edges between a ﬁnite vertex set X ✓V (R) and
its complement V (R) r X into non-edges, and vice versa.
55.
(i)−If we delete inﬁnitely many vertices of the Rado graph R leaving
an inﬁnite rest, does the rest necessarily induce a copy of R?
(ii) Does R admit a vertex partition into two copies of itself?
(iii) Construct a locally ﬁnite tree that has a vertex partition into two
copies of itself.
56.−Prove that the Rado graph is homogeneous.
57.
Show that a homogeneous countable graph is determined uniquely, up
to isomorphism, by the class of (the isomorphism types of) its ﬁnite
subgraphs.
58.
Recall that subgraphs H1, H2, . . . of a graph G are said to partition G if
their edge sets form a partition of E(G). Show that the Rado graph can
be partitioned into any given countable set of countable locally ﬁnite
graphs, as long as each of them contains at least one edge.
59.
A linear order is called dense if between any two elements there lies a
third.
(i) Find, or construct, a countable dense linear order that has nei-
ther a maximal nor a minimal element.
(ii) Show that this order is unique, i.e. that every two such orders
are order-isomorphic. (Deﬁnition?)
(iii) Show that this ordering is universal among the countable linear
orders. Is it homogeneous? (Supply appropriate deﬁnitions.)
60.
Given a bijection f between N and [N]<!, let Gf be the graph on N in
which u, v 2 N are adjacent if u 2 f(v) or vice versa. Prove that all
such graphs Gf are isomorphic.
61.
(for set theorists) Show that, given any countable model of set theory,
the graph whose vertices are the sets and in which two sets are adjacent
if and only if one contains the other as an element, is the Rado graph.

286
8. Inﬁnite Graphs
62.
Find two proofs that every inﬁnitely edge-connected graph has inﬁnitely
many edge-disjoint spanning trees:
(i)−Apply Theorem 8.4.1.
(ii)+ Find a direct argument.
63.−Given sets A, B of vertices in a graph G, show that either G contains
inﬁnitely many edge-disjoint A–B paths or there is a ﬁnite set of edges
separating A from B in G.
64.
Let G be a locally ﬁnite graph. Let us say that a ﬁnite set S of vertices
separates two ends ! and !0 if C(S, !) 6= C(S, !0). Use Proposition
8.4.3 to show that if ! can be separated from !0 by k 2 N but no fewer
vertices, then G contains k disjoint double rays each with one tail in !
and one in !0. Is the same true for all graphs that are not locally ﬁnite?
65.+ Prove the following more structural version of Exercise 46 (i). Let ! be
an end of a graph G. Show that either G contains a TK@0 with all its
rays in !, or there are disjoint ﬁnite sets S0, S1, . . . such that, if Ci is
the component of G −(S0 [ Si) that contains a tail of every ray in !,
we have for all i < j that Ci ) Cj and G[Si [ Ci] contains |Si| disjoint
Si–Si+1 paths for all i > 1.
66.+ Is there a planar @0-regular graph all whose ends have inﬁnite vertex-
degree?
67.−Let A, B be two vertex sets in a locally ﬁnite connected graph G. Can
there be an inﬁnite sequence P1, P2, . . . of disjoint A–B paths such that
each Pn+1 arises from Pn by applying an alternating walk, and such
that some edge e 2 G lies in E[Pn] for inﬁnitely many n but not in
E[Pn] for inﬁnitely many other n?
68.
Construct an example of a small limit of large waves. Can you ﬁnd a
locally ﬁnite one?
69.+ Prove Theorem 8.4.4 for trees.
70.+ Prove Pym’s theorem (8.4.9).
71.
(i)−Prove the naive extension of Dilworth’s theorem to arbitrary in-
ﬁnite posets P: if P has no antichain of order k 2 N, then P can be
partitioned into fewer than k chains. (A proof for countable P will do.)
(ii)−Find a poset that has no inﬁnite antichain and no partition into
ﬁnitely many chains.
(iii) For posets without inﬁnite chains, deduce from Theorem 8.4.10 the
following Erd˝os-Menger-type extension of Dilworth’s theorem: every
such poset has a partition C into chains such that some antichain meets
all the chains in C.
72.
Let G be a countable graph in which for every partial matching there
is an augmenting path.
(i) Find an example of G and a sequence M0, M1, . . . of partial
matchings, each obtained from the previous as its symmetric
di↵erence with the edge set of an augmenting path, so that for
every edge e of G we have e 2 Mn+1 r Mn for inﬁnitely many n.

Exercises
287
(ii) Show that for every partial matching M there exists a sequence
as in (i) such that S
m
T
n>m Mn is the edge set of a 1-factor.
73.
Find an uncountable graph in which every partial matching admits an
augmenting path (ﬁnite or inﬁnite) but which has no 1-factor.
74.−Let G be a countable graph whose ﬁnite subgraphs are all perfect. Show
that G is weakly perfect but not necessarily perfect.
75.+ Let G be the incomparability graph of the binary tree. (Thus, V (G) =
V (T2), and two vertices are adjacent if and only if they are incompa-
rable in the tree-order of T2.) Show that G is perfect but not strongly
perfect.
76.+ (i) Show that the vertices of any inﬁnite connected locally ﬁnite graph
can be enumerated in such a way that every vertex is adjacent to some
later vertex.
(ii) Characterize the class of all these graphs, countable but not neces-
sarily locally ﬁnite, by their separation properties.
77.
Show that a tree has a rank as deﬁned in the second paragraph after
the proof of Proposition 8.5.1 if and only if it is recursively prunable,
and that it has rank ↵if and only if ↵is the maximum of its pruning
labels.
78.
Let G be a rayless graph, of rank ↵say, and let U be a ﬁnite set of
vertices witnessing this, of minimal order. Show that U is unique.
79.
(i) Construct a countable tree that has rank ! in the ranking of rayless
graphs. Can you ﬁnd one such tree that contains all the others?
(ii)+ Is there a tree of rank ! that is a subtree of every such tree?
80.
A graph G = (V, E) is called bounded if for every vertex labelling
`: V ! N there exists a function f: N ! N that exceeds the labelling
along any ray in G eventually. (Formally: for every ray v1v2 . . . in G
there exists an n0 such that f(n) > `(vn) for every n > n0.) Prove the
following assertions:
(i) The ray is bounded.
(ii) Every locally ﬁnite connected graph is bounded.
(iii) A countable tree is bounded if and only if it contains no subdi-
vision of the @0-regular tree T@0.
81.+ Let T be a tree with root r, and let 6 denote the tree-order on V (T)
associated with T and r. Show that T contains no subdivision of the
@1-regular tree T@1 if and only if T has an ordinal labelling t 7! o(t)
such that o(t) > o(t0) whenever t < t0 and no more than countably
many vertices of T have the same label.
82.
Let G be a countable connected graph with vertices v0, v1, . . . .
For
every n 2 N write Sn := {v0, . . . , vn−1}. Prove the following statements:
(i) For every end ! of G there is a unique sequence C0 ◆C1 ◆. . .
of components Cn of G −Sn such that Cn = C(Sn, !) for all n.

288
8. Inﬁnite Graphs
(ii) For every inﬁnite sequence C0 ◆C1 ◆. . . of components Cn of
G −Sn there exists a unique end ! such that Cn = C(Sn, !) for
all n.
83.
Let G be a graph, U ✓V (G), and R 2 ! 2 ⌦(G). Show that G contains
a comb with spine R and teeth in U if and only if ! 2 U.
84.
Given graphs H ✓G, let ⌘: ⌦(H) ! ⌦(G) assign to every end of H the
unique end of G containing it as a subset (of rays). For the following
questions, assume that H is connected and V (H) = V (G).
(i) Show that ⌘need not be injective. Must it be surjective?
(ii) Investigate how ⌘relates the subspace ⌦(H) of |H| to its image
in |G|. Is ⌘always continuous? Is it open? Do the answers to
these questions change if ⌘is known to be injective?
(iii) A spanning tree is called end-faithful if ⌘is bijective, and topo-
logically end-faithful if ⌘is a homeomorphism. Show that every
connected countable graph has a topologically end-faithful span-
ning tree.
The end space of a graph G is the subspace ⌦(G) of |G|.
85.
Consider the end space ⌦of the binary tree T2 shown in Figure 8.1.4,
in which its vertices are the ﬁnite 0–1 sequences.
(i) Show that ⌦is homeomorphic to 2N, where 2 = {0, 1} carries
the discrete topology and 2N the product topology.
(ii) Identify in ⌦every two ends whose inﬁnite binary sequences en-
code the same rational. Show that the resulting quotient space
of ⌦is homeomorphic to the real interval [0, 1].
86.
Above every horizontal edge of the plane graph shown in Figure 8.6.1
add inﬁnitely many horizontal edges in the plane, so as to turn every
pair of rays whose associated 0–1 sequences deﬁne the same rational
number into a ladder.
Prove or disprove that the end space of the
resulting graph is homeomorphic to [0, 1].
87.
A compact metric space is a Cantor set if the singletons are its only
connected subsets and every point is an accumulation point.
(i) Characterize the trees whose end space is a Cantor set.
(ii) Show that the end space of a connected locally ﬁnite graph is a
subset of a Cantor set.
88.
(i) Show that if H is a contraction minor of G with ﬁnite branch sets,
then the end spaces of H and G are homeomorphic.
(ii) Let Tn denote the n-ary tree, the rooted tree in which every vertex
has exactly n successors. Show that all these trees have homeomorphic
end spaces.
89.
Give an independent proof of Proposition 8.6.1 using sequential com-
pactness and the inﬁnity lemma.
