[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 8. Infinite Graphs
현재 소단원: 8.ex Exercises (분할 part 2)
직전 소단원: 「8.8 Infinite graphs as limits of finite ones」
[연습문제]
Exercises
289
90.+ (for topologists) In a locally compact, connected, and locally connected
Hausdor↵space X, consider sequences U1 ◆U2 ◆. . . of open, non-
empty, connected subsets with compact frontiers such that T
i2N Ui = ;.
Call such a sequence equivalent to another such sequence if every set
of one sequence contains some set of the other sequence and vice versa.
Note that this is indeed an equivalence relation, and call its classes the
Freudenthal ends of X. Now add these to the space X, and deﬁne a
natural topology on the extended space ˆ
X that makes it homeomorphic
to |X| if X is a graph, by a homeomorphism that is the identity on X.
91.+ Let G be a connected countable graph that is not locally ﬁnite. Show
that |G| is not compact, but that ⌦(G) is compact if and only if for
every ﬁnite set S ✓V (G) only ﬁnitely many components of G −S
contain a ray.
92.+ Let G be a connected graph. Assuming that G has a normal spanning
tree, deﬁne a metric on |G| that induces its usual topology. Conversely,
use Exercise 43 to show that if V [ ⌦✓|G| is metrizable then G has a
normal spanning tree.
93.
Find a graph G for which |G| is not metrizable.
(Hint. Rather than thinking of metrics directly, recall some properties
of metric spaces, and construct a graph G without such a property.)
A topological space X is locally connected if for every x 2 X and every neigh-
bourhood U of x there is an open connected neighbourhood U 0 ✓U of x.
A continuum is a compact, connected Hausdor↵space. By a theorem of gen-
eral topology, every locally connected metric continuum is arc-connected.
94.+ Show that, for G connected and locally ﬁnite, every connected standard
subspace of |G| is locally connected. Using the theorem cited above,
deduce Lemma 8.6.5.
95.+ Prove Lemma 8.6.6 directly, without relying on Lemma 8.6.5.
96.
Let G be a locally ﬁnite graph, and X a standard subspace of |G|
spanned by a set of at least two edges. Show that X is a circle if and
only if, for every two distinct edges e, e0 2 E(X), the subspace X r˚e is
connected but X r (˚e [˚e0) is disconnected.
97.
Does every inﬁnite locally ﬁnite 2-connected graph contain an inﬁnite
circuit? Does it contain an inﬁnite bond?
98.
Consider a locally ﬁnite graph.
(i) Show that every inﬁnite circuit meets some inﬁnite bond in ex-
actly one edge.
(ii) Show that every inﬁnite bond meets some inﬁnite circuit in ex-
actly one edge.
99.
Show that the union of all the edges contained in an arc or circle C in
|G| is dense in C.
100.+ Prove that the circle shown in Figure 8.6.1 is really a circle, by exhibit-
ing a homeomorphism with S1.

290
8. Inﬁnite Graphs
101.
Every arc induces on its points a linear ordering inherited from [0, 1].
Call an arc in |G| wild if it induces on some subset of its vertices the
ordering of the rationals: between every two there lies another. Show
that every arc containing uncountably many ends is wild.
102.
Find a locally ﬁnite graph G with a connected standard subspace of
|G| that is the closure of a union of disjoint circles.
103.
Show that, for G locally ﬁnite, a closed standard subspace C of |G| is a
circle in |G| if and only if C is connected, every vertex in C is incident
with exactly two edges in C, and every end in C has topological degree 2.
104.
Let T be a locally ﬁnite tree. Construct a continuous map σ: [0, 1]!|T|
that maps 0 and 1 to the root and traverses every edge exactly twice,
once in each direction. (Formally: deﬁne σ so that every inner point of
an edge is the image of exactly two points in [0, 1].)
(Hint. Deﬁne σ as a limit of similar maps σn for ﬁnite subtrees Tn.)
105.
Let G be a connected locally ﬁnite graph.
Show that the following
assertions are equivalent for a spanning subgraph T of G:
(i) T is a topological spanning tree of |G|;
(ii) T is edge-maximal with T containing no circle;
(iii) T is edge-minimal with T a connected subspace of |G|.
106.−(i) Observe that a topological spanning tree need not be homeomorphic
to a tree. Is it homeomorphic to the space |T| for a suitable tree T?
(ii) Find a graph G with an ordinary spanning tree T whose closure
in |G| is not arc-connected.
107.
Let T be an end-faithful spanning tree of a locally ﬁnite graph G. (Such
trees are deﬁned in Exercise 84.) Is T a topological spanning tree of |G|?
108.
Let G be locally ﬁnite and connected, with vertices v0, v1, . . . say. Let
Gn be the minor of G obtained by contracting every component of
G −{v0, . . . , vn} to a vertex. Construct spanning trees Tn of Gn so
that S
n E(Tn) is the edge set of a topological spanning tree of G.
109.
Let F be a set of edges in a locally ﬁnite connected graph G = (V, E).
(i) Show that F is a circuit if and only if F is not contained in the
edge set of any topological spanning tree of G and is minimal
with this property.
(ii) Show that F is a ﬁnite bond if and only if F meets the edge set
of every topological spanning tree of G and is minimal with this
property.
110.
Extend Exercise 51 of Chapter 1 to characterizations of the bonds, and
of the ﬁnite bonds, in a locally ﬁnite connected graph.
111.+ Prove a topological tree-packing theorem for standard subspaces X of
locally ﬁnite graphs. Here, a topological spanning tree of X is a con-
nected closed subspace of X that contains all its vertices but no circle.

Exercises
291
112.
To show that Theorem 3.2.6 does not generalize to inﬁnite graphs with
its ﬁnitary cycle space, construct a 3-connected locally ﬁnite planar
graph with a separating cycle that is not a ﬁnite sum of non-separating
induced cycles. Can you ﬁnd an example where even inﬁnite thin sums
of ﬁnite non-separating induced cycles do not generate all separating
cycles?
113.−As a converse to Theorem 8.7.1 (iii), show that the fundamental cir-
cuits of an ordinary spanning tree T of a locally ﬁnite graph G do not
generate C(G) unless T is a topological spanning tree.
114.−Explain why Theorem 8.7.3 is needed in the proof of Corollary 8.7.4:
can’t we just combine the constituent sums of circuits for the Di (from
our assumption that Di 2 C(G)) into one big family?
115.
Deduce Corollary 8.7.4 from Theorem 8.7.1, not using Theorem 8.7.3.
116.
If a ﬁnite set D of edges meets every ﬁnite cut of G evenly, must it also
meet every inﬁnite cut evenly?
117.
Prove Theorem 8.7.3 by the method used to prove Theorem 8.6.9.
118.
Prove Lemma 8.6.5 by the method used to prove Theorem 8.7.3.
For the next ten exercises, let G be a locally ﬁnite connected graph.
Let
C = C(G), and deﬁne the cut space B = B(G) of G as in Chapter 1.9. Note
that cuts may now be inﬁnite. Deﬁne ‘generate’ for cuts as for circuits, allowing
inﬁnite thin sums. Given a set F ✓E(G), write Fﬁn := { F 2 F : |F| < 1 },
F ? := { D 2 E(G) : |D \ F| 2 2N 8F 2 F } and (Fﬁn)? =: F ?
ﬁn.
119.
Show that C and B are closed in the edge space E = {0, 1}E of G if
{0, 1} carries the discrete topology and {0, 1}E the product topology.
120.
Show that the deﬁnition of Cﬁn given above coincides with that given in
the text: that the ﬁnite elements of C are ﬁnite sums of ﬁnite circuits.
121.
(i) Show that the fundamental circuits of any ordinary spanning tree
of G generate Cﬁn by ﬁnite sums, but that they need not generate C.
(ii) Show that the fundamental cuts of any topological spanning tree
of G generate Bﬁn by ﬁnite sums, but that they need not generate B.
122.
(i)−Show that B is a subspace of E(G) generated by ﬁnite cuts.
(ii) Show that every cut is a disjoint union of bonds.
(iii)+ Show that the fundamental cuts of any ordinary spanning tree
of G generate B.
(iv)+ Show that B is closed under inﬁnite thin sums.
123.
(i)−Find in this book a proof, or sketch of a proof, for each of the
following two statements: C = B?
ﬁn and B = C?
ﬁn.
(ii)+ Show that B? = Cﬁn and, if G is 2-edge-connected, C? = Bﬁn.

292
8. Inﬁnite Graphs
124.+ Write ˆC for the set of circuits in G, and ˆB for the set of bonds.
(i) Show that ˆC?
ﬁn = C?
ﬁn and ˆB?
ﬁn = B?
ﬁn.
(ii) Show that every element of ˆC? is a disjoint union of ﬁnite bonds,
and that every element of ˆB? is a disjoint union of ﬁnite circuits.
(iii) Construct 2-connected graphs with C? ( ˆC? or B? ( ˆB?.
125.
Extending Gallai’s partition theorem of Exercise 55 (ii), Chapter 1,
show that E(G) can be partitioned into a set C 2 C and a set D 2 B.
(This strengthens Exercise 25.)
126.
Let F ✓E(G) be a set of edges.
(i)−Show that F extends to a cut if it contains no odd circuit.
(ii)+ Show that F extends to some D 2 C if it contains no odd bond.
127.+ Let H be an abelian group. The group CH of H-circulations on |G|
consists of the maps :
!
E ! H that satisfy (F1) and (X, Y ) = 0 for
any ﬁnite cut E(X, Y ) of G. (See Chapter 6.1 for notation.) Extend
Exercise 8 of Chapter 6 to CH, with EH and DH as deﬁned there.
128.
Let X be a connected standard subspace of |G|. Call a continuous map
σ: S1 ! X a topological Euler tour of X if it traverses every edge in
E(X) exactly once. (Formally: every inner point of an edge in E(X)
must be the image of exactly one point in S1.) Show that X admits a
topological Euler tour if and only if E(X) 2 C(G).
129.+ An open Euler tour in an inﬁnite connected graph G is a 2-way inﬁnite
walk . . . e−1v0e0 . . . that contains every edge of G exactly once. Show
that G contains an open Euler tour if and only if G is countable, every
vertex has even or inﬁnite degree, and any ﬁnite cut F = E(V1, V2)
with both V1 and V2 inﬁnite is odd.
130.
By Exercise 23 of Chapter 4, every ﬁnite 2-connected graph without
a K4 or K2,3 minor contains a Hamilton cycle, one that contains all
its vertices. Show that every locally ﬁnite such graph has a Hamilton
circle, a circle in |G| containing all the vertices (and ends) of G.
131.+ Extend Theorem 2.4.4 to packings and coverings of locally ﬁnite graphs
with topological spanning trees in appropriate spaces obtained from |G|.
132.
Where in the proof of Theorem 8.8.2 do we use that G is connected?
133.
Use the techniques from Section 8.8 to prove that the wild circle is
indeed a circle. Your proof may be informal in its handling of the wild
circle graph G – use a picture rather than its formal deﬁnition.
134.+ Use the methods from Section 8.8 to prove that connected standard
subspaces of |G|, for G locally ﬁnite, have topological spanning trees:
closed connected subspaces containing all their vertices.
135.+ Consider the space kGk for the edgeless countably inﬁnite graph G.
Have you met this space before in another guise?

Notes
293
Notes
There is no comprehensive monograph on inﬁnite graph theory, but over time
several surveys have been published. A relatively wide-ranging collection of
survey articles can be found in R. Diestel (ed.), Directions in Inﬁnite Graph
Theory and Combinatorics, North-Holland 1992. (This has been reprinted as
Volume 95 of the journal Discrete Mathematics.) Some of the articles there
address purely graph-theoretic aspects of inﬁnite graphs, while others point to
connections with other ﬁelds in mathematics such as di↵erential geometry, to-
pological groups, or logic. A similar collection, edited by R. Diestel, B. Mohar
and G. Hahn, appeared in 2011 as a special issue of Discrete Mathematics
(vol. 311). It includes a survey of everything to do with |G|, the topological
space consisting of an inﬁnite graph G and its ends: R. Diestel, Locally ﬁnite
graphs with ends: a topological approach, arXiv:0912.4213.
Another very
instructive survey in this volume is by L. Soukup, Elementary submodels in
inﬁnite combinatorics, arXiv:1007.4309.
A survey of inﬁnite graph theory as a whole was given by C. Thomas-
sen, Inﬁnite graphs, in (L.W. Beineke & R.J. Wilson, eds.) Selected Topics in
Graph Theory 2, Academic Press 1983. This also treats a number of aspects
of inﬁnite graph theory not considered in our chapter here, including problems
of Erd˝os concerning inﬁnite chromatic number, inﬁnite Ramsey theory (also
known as partition calculus), and reconstruction. The ﬁrst two of these topics
receive much attention also in A. Hajnal’s chapter of the Handbook of Combi-
natorics (R.L. Graham, M. Gr¨otschel & L. Lov´asz, eds.), North-Holland 1995,
which has a strong set-theoretical ﬂavour. P´eter Komj´ath is currently prepar-
ing a monograph about this kind of inﬁnite graph theory. A speciﬁc survey on
reconstruction by Nash-Williams can be found in the Directions volume cited
above. R. Halin, Miscellaneous problems on inﬁnite graphs, J. Graph Theory
35 (2000), 128–151, contains his legacy of unsolved inﬁnite graph problems.
Halin’s book, Graphentheorie (2nd ed.), Wissenschaftliche Buchgesell-
schaft 1989, is also good general reference for inﬁnite graphs. A more speciﬁc
monograph about simplicial decompositions of inﬁnite graphs (see Chapter 12)
is R. Diestel, Graph Decompositions, Oxford University Press 1990. Our Chap-
ter 12.6 closes with two theorems about forbidden minors in inﬁnite graphs.
When sets get bigger than countable, combinatorial set theory o↵ers some
interesting ways other than cardinality to distinguish ‘small’ from ‘large’ sets.
Among these are the use of clubs and stationary sets, of ultraﬁlters, and of
measure and category. See P. Erd˝os, A. Hajnal, A. M´at´e & R. Rado, Combi-
natorial Set Theory: partition relations for cardinals, North-Holland 1984;
W.W. Comfort & S. Negropontis, The Theory of Ultraﬁlters, Springer 1974;
J.C. Oxtoby, Measure and Category: a survey of the analogies between topo-
logical and measure spaces (2nd ed.), Springer 1980.
Inﬁnite matroids, whose study long lay dormant for want of a clear
idea of what exactly they should be, were ﬁnally axiomatized in H. Bruhn,
R. Diestel, M. Kriesell & P. Wollan, Axioms for inﬁnite matroids, Adv. Math.
239 (2013), 18–46, arXiv:1003.3919. Since that paper, the theory of inﬁnite
matroids has ﬂourished. It draws much inspiration from topological inﬁnite
graph theory as presented in Sections 8.6–8.7, but also has its own prob-
lems and agenda. Regular updates can be found in Nathan Bowler’s blog at
