[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 9. Ramsey Theory for Graphs
현재 소단원: 9.4 Ramsey properties and connectivity
직전 소단원: 「9.3 Induced Ramsey theorems」
[본문]
316
9. Ramsey Theory
same colour also for ii0 = em−1. Continuing in this way, we ﬁnally arrive
at an induced copy of G0 in G such that, for each pair (i, i0), all the
edges between V 0
i and V 0
i0 have the same colour. As shown earlier, this
G0 contains a monochromatic induced copy Hj of H.
⇤
The Ramsey graph G for H built in the proof of Theorem 9.3.1 is
sparse in the sense that it contains no complete graphs bigger than it
has to in order to contain H: G and H have the same clique number
!(G) = !(H) (Exercise 23). This property, which comes for free with
this proof of the theorem, is non-trivial even if we do not ask for induced
embeddings: the existence of a graph G that contains a monochromatic
copy of H, induced or not, on any 2-colouring of its edges is neither
obvious nor does it follow easily from Ramsey’s original theorem.
An even stronger sparsity requirement on G is to ask that it should
contain no shorter cycles than H does, that g(G) = g(H). As a small
indication of how ambitious this requirement on G is, notice that the
statement of χ(G) > r can be rephrased as a Ramsey-like property of G:
for any vertex-colouring with at most r colours, G contains a ‘monochro-
matic’ copy of H = K2, an edge joining two like-coloured vertices. But
as we noted in Chapter 5.2, graphs of simultaneously large chromatic
number and girth are diﬃcult to construct.
However, Ramsey graphs of large girth do exist:
Theorem 9.3.4. (Reiher & R¨odl 2023)
Every graph H has a Ramsey graph G that satisﬁes g(G) = g(H) unless
H is a forest, in which case g(G) can be made arbitrarily large.
If H is a tree but not a star, the aim of g(G) = g(H) (= 1) cannot be
realised: if g(G) = 1 then G is a forest, so its edges can be 2-coloured
alternately so that every path of length 3 receives two colours.
9.4 Ramsey properties and connectivity
According to Ramsey’s theorem, every large enough graph G has a very
dense or a very sparse induced subgraph of given order, a Kr or Kr. If
we assume that G is connected, we can say a little more:
Proposition 9.4.1. For every integer r > 1 there is an n 2 N such that
every connected graph of order at least n contains Kr, K1,r or P r as an
induced subgraph.
Proof. Let d + 1 be the Ramsey number of r, let n >
d
d−2(d −1)r, and
(1.3.3)
let G be a graph of order at least n. If G has a vertex v of degree at least

9.4 Ramsey properties and connectivity
317
d + 1 then, by Theorem 9.1.1 and the choice of d, either N(v) induces a
Kr in G or {v} [ N(v) induces a K1,r. On the other hand, if ∆(G) 6 d,
then by Proposition 1.3.3 G has radius > r, and hence contains two
vertices at a distance > r. Any shortest path in G between these two
vertices contains a P r.
⇤
In principle, we could now look for a similar set of ‘unavoidable’
k-connected subgraphs for any given connectivity k. To keep these ‘un-
avoidable sets’ small, it helps to relax the containment relation from
‘induced subgraph’ for k = 1 (as above) to ‘topological minor’ for k = 2,
and on to ‘minor’ for k = 3 and k = 4. For larger k, no similar results
are known.
Proposition 9.4.2. For every integer r > 2 there is an n 2 N such that
every 2-connected graph of order at least n contains Cr or K2,r as a
topological minor.
Proof. Let d be the n associated with r in Proposition 9.4.1, and let G be
(1.3.3)
(3.3.6)
a 2-connected graph with at least
d
d−2(d −1)r vertices. By Proposition
1.3.3, either G has a vertex of degree > d or diam(G) > rad(G) > r.
In the latter case let a, b 2 G be two vertices at distance > r. By
Menger’s theorem (3.3.6), G contains two independent a–b paths. These
form a cycle of length > r.
Assume now that G has a vertex v of degree > d. Since G is 2-
connected, G −v is connected and thus has a spanning tree; let T be
a minimal tree in G −v that contains all the neighbours of v. Then
every leaf of T is a neighbour of v. By the choice of d, either T has a
vertex of degree > r or T contains a path of length > r, without loss of
generality linking two leaves. Together with v, such a path forms a cycle
of length > r. A vertex u of degree > r in T can be joined to v by r
independent paths through T, to form a TK2,r.
⇤
Theorem 9.4.3. (Oporowski, Oxley & Thomas 1993)
For every integer r > 3 there is an n 2 N such that every 3-connected
graph of order at least n contains a wheel of order r or a K3,r as a minor.
Let us call a graph of the form Cn ⇤K2 (n > 4) a double wheel, the
1-skeleton of a triangulation of the cylinder as in Fig. 9.4.1 a crown, and
the 1-skeleton of a triangulation of the M¨obius strip a M¨obius crown.
Theorem 9.4.4. (Oporowski, Oxley & Thomas 1993)
For every integer r > 4 there is an n 2 N such that every 4-connected
graph with at least n vertices has a minor of order at least r that is a
double wheel, a crown, a M¨obius crown, or a K4,r.
Note that the graphs listed in Theorems 9.4.3 and 9.4.4 are themselves
3-connected resp. 4-connected, as required.

318
9. Ramsey Theory
Fig. 9.4.1. A crown and a M¨obius crown
At ﬁrst glance, the ‘unavoidable’ substructures presented in the four
theorems above may seem to be chosen somewhat arbitrarily. In fact,
the contrary is true: these sets are smallest possible, and as such unique.
To make this precise, call a graph property non-trivial if it contains
non-trivial
property
graphs of inﬁnitely many isomorphism types. Given two such properties
P, P0 and an order relation 6 between graphs (such as the subgraph
relation ✓, or the minor relation 4), write P 6 P0 if for every G 2 P
6
there is a G0 2 P0 such that G 6 G0. If P 6 P0 as well as P > P0, call
P and P0 equivalent and write P⇠P0. For example, if 6 is the subgraph
⇠
relation, P is the class of all paths, P0 is the class of paths of even length,
and S is the class of all subdivisions of stars, then P ⇠P0 6 S 6
P.
Given a non-trivial graph property G, call a ﬁnite set {P1, . . . , Pk} of
non-trivial graph properties Pi ✓G a Kuratowski set for G and 6 if the Pi
Kuratowski
set
are incomparable (i.e., Pi 6
Pj whenever i 6= j) and for every non-trivial
graph property P ✓G there is an i such that Pi 6 P. Such a Kuratowski
set {P1, . . . , Pk} is unique up to equivalence: if {Q1, . . . , Q`} is another
Kuratowski set for G then ` = k and, with suitable enumeration, Qi ⇠Pi
for i = 1, . . . , k. (Why?)
The essence of our last four theorems can now be stated more com-
prehensively, as follows. Let us say k-connectedness for the class of all
k-connected ﬁnite graphs, and connectedness for 1-connectedness.
Theorem 9.4.5.
(i) The stars and the paths form the (2-element) Kuratowski set for
connectedness and the subgraph relation.
(ii) The cycles and the graphs K2,r (r > 2) form the (2-element) Kura-
towski set for 2-connectedness and the topological minor relation.
(iii) The wheels and the graphs K3,r (r > 3) form the (2-element)
Kuratowski set for 3-connectedness and the minor relation.
(iv) The double wheels, the crowns, the M¨obius crowns, and the
graphs K4,r (r > 4) form the (4-element) Kuratowski set for 4-
connectedness and the minor relation.
⇤

Exercises
319
Exercises
1.−Determine the Ramsey number R(3).
2.−Deduce the case k = 2 (but c arbitrary) of Theorem 9.1.3 directly from
Theorem 9.1.1.
3.
Prove that the graphs not containing some ﬁxed star as an induced
subgraph are χ-bounded.
(See Chapter 5.6 for the deﬁnition of χ-boundedness.)
4.
Let the edges of a complete graph G on N be coloured with two colours.
Show that G contains two monochromatic paths whose vertex sets par-
tition N.
5.
An arithmetic progression is an increasing sequence of numbers of the
form a, a + d, a + 2d, a + 3d . . . . Van der Waerden’s theorem says that
no matter how we partition the natural numbers into two classes, one of
these classes will contain arbitrarily long arithmetic progressions. Must
there even be an inﬁnite arithmetic progression in one of the classes?
6.
Can you improve the exponential upper bound on the Ramsey number
R(n) for perfect graphs?
7.
Show that the n✏-type bound in the Erd˝os-Hajnal conjecture cannot
be lowered substantially, by ﬁnding a graph H such that inﬁnitely
many graphs G not containing H as an induced subgraph satisfy
↵(G) 6 |G|1/2 as well as !(G) 6 |G|1/2.
8.
Let G be a class of graphs that is closed under taking induced subgraphs.
Assume that G is χ-bounded, with a polynomial χ-bounding function.
Prove the Erd˝os-Hajnal conjecture for the graphs in G.
9.+ Construct a graph on R that has neither a complete nor an edgeless
induced subgraph on |R| = 2@0 vertices. (So Ramsey’s theorem does
not extend to uncountable sets.)
10.
(i)−Use Ramsey’s theorem to show that for any k, ` 2 N there is an
n 2 N such that every sequence of n distinct integers has an increasing
subsequence of length k +1 or a decreasing subsequence of length `+1.
(ii) Prove that n = k` + 1 has this property but n = k` does not.
11.+ Find a short proof of the Erd˝os-P´osa theorem (2.3.2) with a recursively
deﬁned bound.
(Hint. For the recursion step ﬁnd two cycles with at most one vertex
in common. If Menger’s theorem between them does not give you k
disjoint cycles, use the size of the separator it o↵ers for the deﬁnition
of f(k) from f(k −1).)
12.+ Prove the edge version of the Erd˝os-P´osa theorem (2.3.2): there exists a
function g: N ! R such that, given k 2 N, every graph contains either k
edge-disjoint cycles or a set of at most g(k) edges meeting all its cycles.
(Hint. Consider in each component a normal spanning tree.)
