[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 10. Hamilton Cycles
현재 소단원: 10.ex Exercises
직전 소단원: 「10.3 Hamilton cycles in the square of a graph」
[연습문제]
Exercises
335
Fleischner’s theorem has a natural extension to inﬁnite graphs,
which is much harder to prove:
Theorem 10.3.3. (Georgakopoulos 2009)
The square of every 2-connected locally ﬁnite graph contains a Hamilton
circle.
We close the chapter with a far-reaching conjecture generalizing
Dirac’s theorem:
Conjecture. (Seymour 1974)
Let G be a graph of order n > 3, and let k be a positive integer. If G
has minimum degree
δ(G) >
k
k + 1 n ,
then G has a Hamilton cycle H such that Hk ✓G.
For k = 1, this is precisely Dirac’s theorem. The conjecture was proved
for large enough n (depending on k) by Koml´os, S´ark¨ozy and Szemer´edi
(1998).
Exercises
1.
An oriented complete graph is called a tournament. Show that every
tournament contains a (directed) Hamilton path.
2.
Show that every uniquely 3-edge-colourable cubic graph is hamilton-
ian. (‘Unique’ means that all 3-edge-colourings induce the same edge
partition.)
3.
Given an even positive integer k, construct for every n > k a k-regular
graph of order 2n + 1.
4.
Prove or disprove the following strengthening of Proposition 10.1.2:
‘Every k-connected graph G with |G| > 3 and χ(G) > |G|/k has a
Hamilton cycle.’
5.
Let G be a graph, and H := L(G) its line graph.
(i) Show that H is hamiltonian if G has a spanning Eulerian sub-
graph.
(ii)+ Deduce that H is hamiltonian if G is 4-edge-connected.
6.
(i)−Show that hamiltonian graphs are 1-tough.
(ii) Find a graph that is 1-tough but not hamiltonian.
7.
Prove the toughness conjecture for planar graphs. Does it hold with
t = 2, or even with some t < 2?

336
10. Hamilton Cycles
8.−Find a hamiltonian graph whose degree sequence is not hamiltonian.
9.−Let G be a graph with fewer than i vertices of degree at most i, for
every i < |G|/2. Use Chv´atal’s theorem to show that G is hamiltonian.
(Thus in particular, Chv´atal’s theorem implies Dirac’s theorem.)
10.
Prove that the square G2 of a k-connected graph G is k-tough. Use
this to deduce Fleischner’s theorem for graphs satisfying the toughness
conjecture with t = 2.
11.
Show that Exercise 6 (i) has the following weak converse: for every
non-hamiltonian graph G there exists a graph G0 that has a pointwise
greater degree-sequence than G but is not 1-tough.
12.
(i) Show that, unlike the graphs satisfying Dirac’s condition of δ > n/2,
graphs satisfying the degree condition of Theorem 10.1.3 can be sparse:
there exists an integer d for which there are arbitrarily large graphs of
average degree at most d that satisfy the condition.
(ii) Show that there is no integer d that bounds the average degrees of
arbitrarily large graphs satisfying Chv´atal’s degree condition.
13.
Find a connected graph G whose square G2 has no Hamilton cycle.
14.−Deduce from the proof of Fleischner’s theorem that the square of a 2-
connected graph contains a Hamilton path between any two vertices.
15.
Show by induction on |G| that the third power G3 of any connected
graph G of order at least 3 contains a Hamilton cycle.
16.+ Let G be a graph in which every vertex has odd degree. Show that
every edge of G lies on an even number of Hamilton cycles.
(Hint.
Let xy
2 E(G) be given.
The Hamilton cycles through xy
correspond to the Hamilton paths in G −xy from x to y. Consider the
set H of all Hamilton paths in G −xy starting at x, and show that an
even number of these end in y. To show this, deﬁne a graph on H so
that the desired assertion follows from Proposition 1.2.1.)
Notes
The problem of ﬁnding a Hamilton cycle in a graph has the same kind of origin
as its Euler tour counterpart and the four colour problem: all three problems
come from mathematical puzzles older than graph theory itself. What began
as a game invented by W.R. Hamilton in 1857 – in which ‘Hamilton cycles’
had to be found on the graph of the dodecahedron – re-emerged over a hun-
dred years later as a combinatorial optimization problem of prime importance:
the travelling salesman problem. Here, a salesman has to visit a number of
customers, and his problem is to arrange these in a suitable circular route.
(For reasons not included in the mathematical brief, the route has to be such
that after visiting a customer the salesman does not pass through that town
again.) Much of the motivation for considering Hamilton cycles comes from
variations of this algorithmic problem.
