[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 12. Graph Minors
현재 소단원: 12.7 The graph minor theorem (분할 part 1)
직전 소단원: 「12.6 Tree-decompositions and forbidden minors」
[본문]
396
12. Graph Minors
a bounded number of vertices makes H planar except for a subgraph
of bounded linear width sewn on to the unique cu↵of S2 −1.) A tree-
decomposition (T, (Vt)t2T ) of a graph G has ﬁnite adhesion if all its
ﬁnite
adhesion
adhesion sets are ﬁnite and for every inﬁnite path t1t2 . . . in T the value
of lim infi!1 |Vti \ Vti+1| is ﬁnite.
Unlike its counterpart for Kn, the excluded-K@0 structure theorem
has a direct converse. It thus characterizes the graphs without a K@0
minor, as follows:
Theorem 12.6.8. A graph G has no K@0 minor if and only if G has a
tree-decomposition of ﬁnite adhesion whose torsos are nearly planar.
Finally, a structure theorem for excluding K@0 as a topological minor.
Let us say that G has ﬁnite tree-width if G admits a tree-decomposition
ﬁnite
tree-width
(T, (Vt)t2T ) into ﬁnite parts such that for every inﬁnite path t1t2 . . . in
T the set S
j>1
T
i>j Vti is ﬁnite.
Theorem 12.6.9. The following assertions are equivalent for connected
graphs G:
(i) G does not contain K@0 as a topological minor;
(ii) G has ﬁnite tree-width;
(iii) G has a normal spanning tree T such that for every ray R in T
there are only ﬁnitely many vertices v such that G contains an
inﬁnite v–(R −v) fan.
12.7 The graph minor theorem
Graph properties that are closed under taking minors occur frequently
in graph theory. Among the most natural examples are the properties
of being embeddable in some ﬁxed surface, such as planarity.
By Kuratowski’s theorem, planarity can be expressed by forbidding
the minors K5 and K3,3. This is a good characterization of planarity in
the following sense. Suppose we wish to persuade someone that a certain
graph is planar: this is easy (at least intuitively) if we can produce a
drawing of the graph. But how do we persuade someone that a graph is
non-planar? By Kuratowski’s theorem, there is also an easy way to do
that: we just have to exhibit an IK5 or IK3,3 in our graph, as an easily
checked ‘certiﬁcate’ for non-planarity. Our simple Proposition 12.6.2 is
another example of a good characterization: if a graph has tree width
< 3, we can prove this by exhibiting a suitable tree-decomposition; if
not, we can produce an IK4 as evidence.

12.7 The graph minor theorem
397
Theorems that characterize a property P by a set of forbidden mi-
nors are doubtless among the most attractive results in graph theory.
As we saw in Lemma 12.6.1, such a characterization exists whenever P
(12.6.1)
is minor-closed: then P = Forb4(P), where P is the complement of P.
However, one naturally seeks to make the set of forbidden minors as
small as possible. And there is indeed a unique smallest such set: the
set
KP := { H | H is 4-minimal in P }
Kuratowski
set KP
satisﬁes P = Forb4(KP) and is contained in every other set H such that
P = Forb4(H). We call KP the Kuratowski set for P.
Clearly, the elements of KP are incomparable under the minor re-
lation 4. Now the graph minor theorem of Robertson & Seymour says
that any set of 4-incomparable graphs must be ﬁnite:
Theorem 12.7.1. (Robertson & Seymour 1986–2004)
graph minor
theorem
The ﬁnite graphs are well-quasi-ordered by the minor relation 4.
We shall give a sketch of the proof of the graph minor theorem at the
end of this section.
Corollary 12.7.2. The Kuratowski set for any minor-closed graph
property is ﬁnite.
⇤
As a special case of Corollary 12.7.2 we have, at least in principle,
a Kuratowski-type theorem for every surface S: the property P(S) of
P(S)
embeddability in S is characterized by the ﬁnite set KP(S) of forbidden
minors.
Corollary 12.7.3. For every surface S there exists a ﬁnite set of graphs
H1, . . . , Hn such that a graph is embeddable in S if and only if it contains
none of H1, . . . , Hn as a minor.
⇤
While Corollary 12.7.3 is immediate from the graph minor theorem,
it can also be proved more directly. It is our next goal to do this. The
main step is to prove that the graphs in KP(S) do not contain arbitrarily
large grids as minors (Lemma 12.7.4). Then their tree-width is bounded
(Theorem 12.6.3), so KP(S) is well-quasi-ordered (Theorem 12.4.2) and
therefore ﬁnite.
The proof of Lemma 12.7.4 gives a good impression of the inter-
play between graph minors and surface topology, which – by way of
Theorem 12.6.6, which we could not prove here – is also one of the
key ingredients of the proof of the graph minor theorem. Appendix B
summarizes the necessary background on surfaces, including a lemma

398
12. Graph Minors
R2
R5
f
Fig. 12.7.1. The hexagonal grid H6 with central face f and
rings R2 and R5
used in the proof. For convenience (cf. Proposition 1.7.3 (ii)), we shall
work with hexagonal rather than square grids.
Denote by Hr the plane hexagonal grid whose dual has radius r
Hr
(Figure 12.7.1). The face corresponding to the central vertex of its dual
is its central face. (Generally, when we speak of the faces of Hr, we
faces
mean its hexagonal faces, not its outer face.) Call a subgrid Hk of Hr
standard if their central faces coincide. We write Sk for the perimeter
standard
cycle of the standard subgrid Hk in Hr; for example, S1 is the hexagon
S1, . . . , Sr
bounding the central face of Hr. The ring Rk is the subgraph of Hr
ring Rk
formed by Sk and Sk+1 and the edges between them.
Lemma 12.7.4. For every surface S there exists an integer r such that
no graph that is minimal with the property of not being embeddable
in S contains Hr as a topological minor.
Proof. Let G be a graph that cannot be embedded in S and is minimal
(4.1.2)
(4.2.2)
(4.3.2)
(App. B)
with this property.
Our proof will run roughly as follows.
Since G
is minimally not embeddable in S, we can embed it in an only slightly
larger surface S0. If G contains a very large Hr grid, then by Lemma B.6
some large Hm subgrid will be ﬂat in S0, that is, the union of its faces
in S0 will be a disc D0. We then pick an edge e from the middle of this
Hm grid and embed G −e in S. Again by Lemma B.6, one of the rings
of our Hm will be ﬂat in S. In this ring we can embed the (planar)
subgraph of G which our ﬁrst embedding had placed in D0; note that
this subgraph contains the edge e. The rest of G can then be embedded
in S outside this ring much as before, yielding an embedding of all of G
in S (a contradiction).
More formally, let " := "(S) denote the Euler genus of S. Let r
be large enough that Hr contains " + 3 disjoint copies of Hm+1, where
"
m := 3" + 4. We show that G has no THr subgraph.
r, m
Let e0 = u0v0 be any edge of G, and choose an embedding σ0 of
G −e0 in S. Choose a face with u0 on its boundary, and another with v0

12.7 The graph minor theorem
399
on its boundary. Cut a disc out of each face and add a handle between
the two holes, to obtain a surface S0 of Euler genus " + 2 (Lemma B.3).
Embedding e0 along this handle, extend σ0 to an embedding of G in S0.
σ0: G ,! S0
Suppose G has a subgraph H = THr. Let f: Hr ! H map the
H
vertices of Hr to the corresponding branch vertices of H, and its edges
f
to the corresponding paths in H between those vertices. Let us show
that Hr has a subgrid Hm (not necessarily standard) whose hexagonal
face boundaries correspond (by σ0 ◦f) to circles in S0 that bound disjoint
open discs there.
By the choice of r, we can ﬁnd " + 3 disjoint copies of Hm+1 in Hr.
The standard subgrids Hm of these Hm+1 are not only disjoint, but
suﬃciently spaced out in Hr that their deletion leaves a tree T ✓Hr
that sends an edge to each of them (Figure 12.7.2). Hence whenever
we pick one hexagon from each of these Hm and delete the images C
of those hexagons in S0, the component D0 of the remainder of S0 that
contains (σ0 ◦f)(T) meets all those C in its boundary. By Lemma B.6
and "(S0) = " + 2, therefore, it cannot be true that none of our circles C
bounds a disc in S0 that is disjoint from (σ0 ◦f)(T).
Fig. 12.7.2. Disjoint copies of Hm (m = 3) linked up by a tree
in the rest of Hr
Hence for one of our copies of Hm in Hr, the image of every hexagon
in S0 bounds an open disc that is disjoint from (σ0 ◦f)(T). Let us show
that these discs are disjoint. If not, then one of them, D say, contains
a point x from the boundary of another such disc.
But then D also
contains (σ0 ◦f)(T), contrary to assumption, because we can walk from
x to (σ0 ◦f)(T) in (σ0 ◦f)(Hr) ✓S0 avoiding the boundary of D.
From now on, we shall work with this ﬁxed Hm and will no longer
consider its supergraph Hr. We write Ci := f(Si) for the images in G
Ci
of the concentric cycles Si of this Hm (i = 1, . . . , m).
Pick an edge e = uv of C1, and choose an embedding σ of G−e in S.
e
σ: G −e ,! S
As before, Lemma B.6 implies that one of the " + 1 disjoint rings R3i+2
in our Hm (i = 0, . . . , "), Rk say, has the property that its hexagons
k

400
12. Graph Minors
correspond (by σ ◦f) to circles in S that bound disjoint open discs there
(Figure 12.7.3). Let R ◆(σ ◦f)(Rk) be the closure in S of the union
R
of those discs, which is a cylinder in S. One of its two boundary circles
is the image under σ of the cycle C := Ck+1 in G to which f maps the
C
perimeter cycle Sk+1 of our special ring Rk ✓Hm.
Fig. 12.7.3. A tree linking up hexagons selected from the rings
R2, R5, R8 . . .
Let H0 := f(Hk+1) ✓G, where Hk+1 is standard in our Hm. Recall
H0
that σ0 ◦f maps the hexagons of Hk+1 to circles in S0 bounding disjoint
open discs there. The closure in S0 of the union of these discs is a disc
D0 in S0, bounded by σ0(C). Deleting a small open disc inside D0 that
D0
does not meet σ0(G), we obtain a cylinder R0 ✓S0 that contains σ0(H0).
R0
We shall now combine the embeddings σ: G−e ,! S and σ0: G ,! S0
to an embedding σ00: G ,! S, which will contradict the choice of G.
σ00
Let ': σ0(C) ! σ(C) be a homeomorphism between the images of C in
S0 and in S that commutes with these embeddings, i.e., is such that
σ|C = (' ◦σ0)|C. Then extend this to a homeomorphism ': R0 ! R.
'
The idea now is to deﬁne σ00 as ' ◦σ0 on the part of G which σ0 maps
to D0 (which includes the edge e on which σ is undeﬁned), and as σ on
the rest of G (Fig. 12.7.4).
To make these two partial maps compatible, we start by deﬁning
σ00 on C as σ|C = (' ◦σ0)|C.
Next, we deﬁne σ00 separately on the
components of G −C. Since σ0(C) bounds the disc D0 in S0, we know
that σ0 maps each component J of G−C either entirely to D0 or entirely
to S0 r D0. On all the components J such that σ0(J) ✓D0, and on all
the edges they send to G, we deﬁne σ00 as ' ◦σ0.
Thus, σ00 embeds
these components in R. Since e 2 f(Hk) = H0 −C, this includes the
component of G −C that contains e.
It remains to deﬁne σ00 on the components of G −C which σ0 maps
to S0 r D0. As σ0(Ck) ✓D0, these do not meet Ck. Since σ(C [ Ck) is

12.7 The graph minor theorem
401
S
S0
R
R0
D0
σ(u0)
σ0(v0)
σ0(e0)
σ0(e)
σ0(C)
σ0(G)
'
σ(u)
σ(v)
σ(G −e)
σ(C)
σ(Ck+2)
Fig. 12.7.4. Combining σ0: G ,! S0 and σ: G−e ,! S to σ00: G ,! S
the frontier of R in S, this means that σ(J) ✓S r R or σ(J) ✓R for
every such component J.
For the component J0 of G −C that contains Ck+2 we cannot have
J0
σ(J0) ✓R: as Sk+2 \ Rk = ;, this would mean that σ(Ck+2) lies in
a disc D ✓R corresponding to a face of Rk, which is impossible since
Sk+2 sends edges to vertices of Sk+1 outside the boundary of that face.
We thus have σ(J0) ✓S r R, and deﬁne σ00 as σ on J0 and on all the
J0–C edges of G.
Next, consider any remaining component J of G −C that sends no
edge to C. If σ(J) ✓S r R, we deﬁne σ00 on J as σ. If σ(J) ✓R, then
J is planar. Since J sends no edge to C, we can have σ00 map J to any
open disc in R that has not so far been used by σ00.
It remains to deﬁne σ00 on the components J 6= J0 of G −C which
σ0 maps to S0 r D0 and for which G contains a J–C edge. Let J be the
J
set of all those components J. We shall group them by the way they
attach to C, and deﬁne σ00 for these groups in turn.
. . .
D00
J0
J0
J0
fi
w
Q
Ck+2
C = Ck+1
vi+1
vn
R0
J0
J
Pi
D0
v1
vi
. . .
Fig. 12.7.5. Deﬁne σ00 jointly for the components J, J0 2 J
that attach to the same Pi ✓C

402
12. Graph Minors
Since m > k + 2, the disc D0 lies inside a larger disc in S0, which is
the union of D0 and closed discs D00 bounded by the images under σ0 ◦f
D00
of the hexagons in Rk+1. By deﬁnition of J , the embedding σ0 maps
every J 2 J to such a disc D00 (Fig. 12.7.5). On the path P in C such
that σ0(P) = σ0(C) \ D00 (which is the image under f of one or two con-
secutive edges on Sk+1), let v1, . . . , vn be the vertices with a neighbour
in J0, in their natural order along P, and write Pi for the segment of P
Pi
from vi to vi+1. For any vi with 1 < i < n, pick a vi–J0 edge and extend
it through J0 to a path Q from vi to Ck+2 (which exists by deﬁnition
of J0); let w be its ﬁrst vertex that σ0 maps to the boundary circle of D00.
By Lemma 4.1.2 applied to σ0(viQw) and the two arcs joining σ0(vi) to
σ0(w) along the boundary circle of D00, there is no arc through D00 that
links σ0(Pi−1) to σ0(Pi) but avoids σ0(viQw). Hence, every J 2 J with
σ0(J) ✓D00 has all its neighbours on C in the same Pi, and σ0 maps
J to the face fi of the plane graph σ0(G[J0 [ C]) \ D00 whose boundary
fi
contains Pi. We shall deﬁne σ00 jointly on all those J 2 J which σ0 maps
to this fi, for i = 1, . . . , n −1 in turn.
To do so, we choose an open disc Di in S r R that has a boundary
circle containing σ(Pi) and avoids the image of σ00 as deﬁned until now.
Such Di exists in a strip neighbourhood of σ(C) in S, because compo-
nents J0 2 J attaching to a segment Pj 6= Pi of C send no edge to ˚
Pi.
Choose a homeomorphism 'i from the boundary circle of fi to that of
Di so that σ|Pi = ('i ◦σ0)|Pi, and extend this to a homeomorphism 'i
from the closure of fi in S0 to the closure of Di in S. For every J 2 J
with σ0(J) ✓fi, and for all J–C edges of G, deﬁne σ00 as 'i ◦σ0.
⇤
Proof of Corollary 12.7.3.
By their minimality, the graphs in
(1.7.3)
(12.4.2)
(12.6.3)
KP(S) are incomparable under the minor-relation. If their tree-width is
bounded, then KP(S) is well-quasi-ordered by the minor relation (The-
orem 12.4.2), and hence must be ﬁnite. So assume their tree-width is
unbounded, and let r be as in Lemma 12.7.4. By Theorem 12.6.3, some
H 2 KP(S) has a grid minor large enough to contain Hr. By Proposition
1.7.3, Hr is a topological minor of H, contrary to the choice of r.
⇤
We ﬁnally come to the proof of the graph minor theorem itself. The
complete proof would still ﬁll a book or two, but we are well equipped
now to get a good understanding of its main ideas and overall structure.
For background on surfaces, we once more refer to Appendix B.
Proof of the graph minor theorem (sketch). We have to show that
(12.1.3)
(12.2.1)
(12.4.2)
(12.6.3)
every inﬁnite sequence
G0, G1, G2, . . .
of ﬁnite graphs contains a good pair: two graphs Gi 4 Gj with i < j.
We may assume that G0 64 Gi for all i > 1, since G0 forms a good pair

12.7 The graph minor theorem
403
with any graph Gi of which it is a minor. Thus all the graphs G1, G2, . . .
lie in Forb4(G0), and we may use the structure common to these graphs
in our search for a good pair.
We have already seen how this works when G0 is planar: then the
graphs in Forb4(G0) have bounded tree-width (Corollary 12.6.4) and
are therefore well-quasi-ordered by Theorem 12.4.2. In general, we need
only consider the cases of G0 = Kn: since G0 4 Kn for n := |G0|, we
may assume that Kn 64 Gi for all i > 1.
The proof now follows the same lines as above: again the graphs
in Forb4(Kn) can be characterized by their tree-decompositions, and
again their tree structure helps, as in Kruskal’s theorem, with the proof
that they are well-quasi-ordered. But as in Wagner’s theorem (7.3.4) for
n = 5, the parts in these tree-decompositions are no longer constrained in
terms of order now but in more subtle structural terms. Roughly speak-
ing, for every n there exists a ﬁnite set S of surfaces such that every graph
without a Kn minor has a tree-decomposition into parts each ‘nearly’
embeddable in one of the surfaces S 2 S; see Theorem 12.6.6. By a
generalization of Theorem 12.4.2 – and hence of Kruskal’s theorem – it
now suﬃces, essentially, to prove that the set of all the parts in these tree-
decompositions is well-quasi-ordered: then the graphs decomposing into
these parts are well-quasi-ordered, too. Since S is ﬁnite, every inﬁnite
sequence of such parts has an inﬁnite subsequence whose members are
all (nearly) embeddable in the same surface S 2 S. Thus all we have to
show is that, given any surface S, all the graphs embeddable in S are
well-quasi-ordered by the minor relation.
This is shown by induction on the Euler genus of S, using the same
approach as before: if H0, H1, H2, . . . is an inﬁnite sequence of graphs
embeddable in S, we may assume that none of the graphs H1, H2, . . .
contains H0 as a minor. If S = S2 we are back in the case that H0 is
planar, so the induction starts. For the induction step we now assume
that S 6= S2.
Again, the exclusion of H0 as a minor constrains the
structure of the graphs H1, H2, . . ., this time topologically: each Hi with
i > 1 has an embedding in S which meets some circle Ci ✓S that does
not bound a disc in S in no more than a bounded number of vertices
(and no edges), say in Xi ✓V (Hi). (The bound on |Xi| depends on H0,
but not on Hi.) Cutting along Ci and capping the hole(s), we obtain one
or two new surfaces of smaller Euler genus. If the cut produces only one
new surface Si, then our embedding of Hi −Xi still counts as a near-
embedding of Hi in Si (since Xi is small). If this happens for inﬁnitely
many i, then inﬁnitely many of the surfaces Si are also the same, and
the induction hypothesis gives us a good pair among the corresponding
graphs Hi. On the other hand, if we get two surfaces S0
i and S00
i for
inﬁnitely many i (without loss of generality the same two surfaces), then
Hi decomposes accordingly into subgraphs H0
i and H00
i embedded in these
surfaces, with V (H0
i \ H00
i ) = Xi. The set of all these subgraphs taken

404
12. Graph Minors
together is again well-quasi-ordered by the induction hypothesis, and
hence so are the pairs (H0
i, H00
i ) by Lemma 12.1.3. Using a sharpening
of the lemma that takes into account not only the graphs H0
i and H00
i
themselves but also how Xi lies inside them, we ﬁnally obtain indices
i, j not only with H0
i 4 H0
j and H00
i 4 H00
j , but also such that these
minor embeddings extend to the desired minor embedding of Hi in Hj –
completing the proof of the graph minor theorem.
The graph minor theorem does not extend to graphs of arbitrary
cardinality, but it might extend to countable graphs. Whether or not it
does appears to be a diﬃcult problem. It may be related to the following
intriguing conjecture, which easily implies the graph minor theorem for
ﬁnite graphs (Exercise 68). Call a graph H a proper minor of G if there
is a contraction from a subgraph of G onto H that is not an isomorphism
from G to H.
Self-minor conjecture. (Seymour 1980s)
Every countably inﬁnite graph is a proper minor of itself.
In addition to its impact on ‘pure’ graph theory, the graph mi-
nor theorem has had far-reaching algorithmic consequences. Using their
structure theorem for the graphs in Forb4(Kn), Theorem 12.6.6, Robert-
son and Seymour have shown that testing for any ﬁxed minor is ‘fast’:
for every graph H there is a polynomial-time algorithm14 that decides
whether or not the input graph contains H as a minor. By the minor
theorem, then, every minor-closed graph property P can be decided in
polynomial (even cubic) time: if KP = {H1, . . . , Hk} is the correspond-
ing set of forbidden minors, then testing a graph G for membership in
P reduces to testing the k assertions Hi 4 G.
The following example gives an indication of how deeply this algo-
rithmic corollary a↵ects the complexity theory of graph algorithms. Let
us call a graph knotless if it can be embedded in R3 so that none of its
cycles forms a non-trivial knot. Before the graph minor theorem, it was
an open problem whether knotlessness is decidable, that is, whether any
algorithm exists (no matter how slow) that decides for any given graph
whether or not that graph is knotless. To this day, no such algorithm
is known. The property of knotlessness, however, is easily ‘seen’ to be
closed under taking minors: contracting an edge of a graph embedded
in 3-space will not create a knot where none had been before. Hence, by
the minor theorem, there exists an algorithm that decides knotlessness –
even in polynomial (cubic) time!
However spectacular such unexpected solutions to long-standing
problems may be, viewing the graph minor theorem merely in terms
of its corollaries will not do it justice. At least as important are the
14 indeed a cubic one – although with an enormous constant depending on H
