[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 12. Graph Minors
현재 소단원: 12.7 The graph minor theorem (분할 part 2)
직전 소단원: 「12.6 Tree-decompositions and forbidden minors」
[본문]
405
techniques developed for its proof, the various ways in which minors are
handled or constructed. Most of these have not even been touched upon
here, yet they seem set to inﬂuence the development of graph theory for
many years to come.
Exercises
1.−Let 6 be a quasi-ordering on a set X.
Call two elements x, y
2 X
equivalent if both x 6 y and y 6 x.
Show that this is indeed an
equivalence relation on X, and that 6 induces a partial ordering on the
set of equivalence classes.
2.
Let (A, 6) be a quasi-ordering. For subsets X ✓A write
Forb6(X) := { a 2 A | a 6> x for all x 2 X } .
Show that 6 is a well-quasi-ordering on A if and only if every subset
B ✓A that is closed under 6 (i.e. such that x 6 y 2 B ) x 2 B) can
be written as B = Forb6(X) with ﬁnite X.
3.
Prove Proposition 12.1.1 and Corollary 12.1.2 directly, without using
Ramsey’s theorem.
4.−Show that the relation 6 between rooted trees deﬁned in the text is
indeed a quasi-ordering.
5.
Show that the ﬁnite trees are not well-quasi-ordered by the subgraph
relation.
6.
The last step of the proof of Kruskal’s theorem considers a ‘topological’
embedding of Tm in Tn that maps the root of Tm to the root of Tn.
Suppose we assume inductively that the trees of Am are embedded in
the trees of An in the same way, with roots mapped to roots. We thus
seem to obtain a proof that the ﬁnite rooted trees are well-quasi-ordered
by the subgraph relation, even with roots mapped to roots. Where is
the error?
7.
Extend Kruskal’s theorem to trees whose vertices are labelled from a
well-quasi-ordered set. The tree embedding is deﬁned as before but in
addition respects the ordering of the labels.
8.
Are the connected ﬁnite graphs well-quasi-ordered by contraction alone
(i.e. by taking minors without deleting edges or vertices)?
9.+ Relax the minor relation by not insisting that branch sets be connected.
Show that the ﬁnite graphs are well-quasi-ordered by this relation.
10.+ Show that the ﬁnite graphs are not well-quasi-ordered by the topological
minor relation.
11.+ Given k 2 N, is the class { G | G 6◆P k } well-quasi-ordered by the
subgraph relation?
Exercises
