[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 12. Graph Minors
현재 소단원: 12.ex Exercises
직전 소단원: 「12.7 The graph minor theorem」
[연습문제]
405
techniques developed for its proof, the various ways in which minors are
handled or constructed. Most of these have not even been touched upon
here, yet they seem set to inﬂuence the development of graph theory for
many years to come.
Exercises
1.−Let 6 be a quasi-ordering on a set X.
Call two elements x, y
2 X
equivalent if both x 6 y and y 6 x.
Show that this is indeed an
equivalence relation on X, and that 6 induces a partial ordering on the
set of equivalence classes.
2.
Let (A, 6) be a quasi-ordering. For subsets X ✓A write
Forb6(X) := { a 2 A | a 6> x for all x 2 X } .
Show that 6 is a well-quasi-ordering on A if and only if every subset
B ✓A that is closed under 6 (i.e. such that x 6 y 2 B ) x 2 B) can
be written as B = Forb6(X) with ﬁnite X.
3.
Prove Proposition 12.1.1 and Corollary 12.1.2 directly, without using
Ramsey’s theorem.
4.−Show that the relation 6 between rooted trees deﬁned in the text is
indeed a quasi-ordering.
5.
Show that the ﬁnite trees are not well-quasi-ordered by the subgraph
relation.
6.
The last step of the proof of Kruskal’s theorem considers a ‘topological’
embedding of Tm in Tn that maps the root of Tm to the root of Tn.
Suppose we assume inductively that the trees of Am are embedded in
the trees of An in the same way, with roots mapped to roots. We thus
seem to obtain a proof that the ﬁnite rooted trees are well-quasi-ordered
by the subgraph relation, even with roots mapped to roots. Where is
the error?
7.
Extend Kruskal’s theorem to trees whose vertices are labelled from a
well-quasi-ordered set. The tree embedding is deﬁned as before but in
addition respects the ordering of the labels.
8.
Are the connected ﬁnite graphs well-quasi-ordered by contraction alone
(i.e. by taking minors without deleting edges or vertices)?
9.+ Relax the minor relation by not insisting that branch sets be connected.
Show that the ﬁnite graphs are well-quasi-ordered by this relation.
10.+ Show that the ﬁnite graphs are not well-quasi-ordered by the topological
minor relation.
11.+ Given k 2 N, is the class { G | G 6◆P k } well-quasi-ordered by the
subgraph relation?
Exercises

406
12. Graph Minors
12.−Let G be a graph, T a tree, and V = (Vt)t2T a family of subsets of V (G).
Show that (T, V) is a tree-decomposition of G if and only if
(i) for every v 2 V (G) the set Tv := { t | v 2 Vt } is connected in T;
(ii) Tu \ Tv 6= ; for every edge uv of G.
13.−Consider a tree-decomposition of a graph G in which some parts contain
other parts. Modify it into a tree-decomposition whose parts are the
✓-maximal parts of the ﬁrst decomposition. How does the new tree
arise from the old?
14.
Let G be a graph, T a set, and (Vt)t2T a family of subsets of V (G) satis-
fying (T1) and (T2) from the deﬁnition of a tree-decomposition. Show
that there exists a tree on T that makes (T3) true if and only if there
exists an enumeration t1, . . . , tn of T such that for every k = 2, . . . , n
there is a j < k satisfying Vtk \ S
i<k Vti ✓Vtj.
(The new condition tends to be more convenient to check than (T3).
It can help, for example, with the construction of a tree-decomposition
into a given set of parts.)
15.
Prove the following converse of Lemma 12.3.1: if (T, V) satisﬁes con-
dition (T1) and the statement of the lemma, then (T, V) is a tree-
decomposition of G.
16.
Recall that two separations {U1, U2} and {W1, W2} of G are nested if
we can choose i, j 2 {1, 2} so that Ui ✓Wj and U3−i ◆W3−j.
(i) Show that the separations Se := {U1, U2} in Lemma 12.3.1 are
pairwise nested (for di↵erent choices of the edge e = t1t2 2 T).
(ii)+ Conversely, show that given a set N of nested separations of G
there is a tree-decomposition (T, V) of G such that N = { Se |
e 2 E(T) }.
17.+ Prove Theorem 12.3.7 for k = 3. Speciﬁcally, prove Tutte’s theorem
that every 2-connected graph has a tree-decomposition of adhesion 2
whose torsos are each either 3-connected or a cycle. Conversely, show
that every graph with such a tree-decomposition is 2-connected.
(Hint. Try the tree-decomposition deﬁned, as in Exercise 16 (ii), by
the set of all separations of order 2 that are nested with all other such
separations.)
18.
Describe the tree-decomposition of a contraction minor H of G which
a given tree-decomposition of G induces as in Lemma 12.3.3, in terms
subtrees of T (as in Exercise 12).
19.−Show that any graph with a simplicial tree-decomposition into k-
colourable parts is itself k-colourable.
20.
Let H be a set of graphs, and let G be constructed recursively from
elements of H by pasting along complete subgraphs. Show that G has
a simplicial tree-decomposition into elements of H.

Exercises
407
21.
Use the previous exercise to show that G has no K5 minor if and only
if G has a tree-decomposition in which every torso is either planar or a
copy of the Wagner graph W (Figure 7.3.1).
22.+ Call a graph irreducible if it is not separated by any complete subgraph.
Every ﬁnite graph G can be decomposed into irreducible induced sub-
graphs, as follows. If G has a separating complete subgraph S, then de-
compose G into proper induced subgraphs G0 and G00 with G = G0 [G00
and G0 \ G00 = S. Then decompose G0 and G00 in the same way, and so
on, until all the graphs obtained are irreducible. By Exercise 20, G has
a simplicial tree-decomposition into these irreducible subgraphs. Show
that they are uniquely determined if the complete separators were all
chosen minimal.
23.
If F is a family of sets, then the graph G on F with XY
2 E(G) ,
X \ Y 6= ; is called the intersection graph of F. Show that a graph
is chordal if and only if it is isomorphic to the intersection graph of a
family of (vertex sets of) subtrees of a tree.
24.
Show that for n > 3 the graphs Kn, Cn, an arbitrary tree of order n,
and the n⇥n grid have tree-decompositions of widths n−1, 2, 1, and n,
respectively. For Kn and Cn show that these values are best possible.
25.
Can the tree-width of a subdivision of a graph G be smaller than tw(G)?
Can it be larger?
26.
Show that the tree-width of a ﬁnite graph is at least its minimum
degree. Is this still true for inﬁnite graphs?
27.+ Show that if a graph has circumference k 6= 0, then its tree-width is at
most k −1.
28.+ A graph is called outerplanar if it has a drawing in which every vertex
lies on the boundary of the outer face. Show that outerplanar graphs
can have arbitrarily large tree-width, or ﬁnd the best upper bound.
A tree-decomposition whose tree is a path is a path-decomposition. The path-
width pw(G) of G is the least width of a path-decomposition of G.
29.
Show that a graph has a path-decomposition into complete graphs if
and only if it is isomorphic to an interval graph. (Interval graphs are
deﬁned in Exercise 44, Ch. 5.)
30.
(continued)
Prove the following analogue of Proposition 12.4.4 for path-width:
every graph G satisﬁes pw(G) = min !(H) −1, where the minimum is
taken over all interval graphs H containing G.
31.+ Do trees have unbounded path-width?
A transaction of a sequence (v1, . . . , vn) of vertices is a set of disjoint paths
from an initial segment {v1, . . . , vi} to the rest, {vi+1, . . . , vn}.

408
12. Graph Minors
32.+ Given k 2 N and a sequence v1, . . . , vn of vertices in a graph G, show
that G has a path-decomposition (V1, . . . , Vn) of adhesion 6 k, with
vi 2 Vi for all i, if and only if G contains no transaction P of (v1, . . . , vn)
of order |P| > k.
33.
Show that the cycle Cn has connected tree-width dn/2e.
34.
Show that the n ⇥n grid has tree-width n.
35.−Let B be a maximum-order bramble in a graph G. Show that every
minimum-width tree-decomposition of G has a unique part covering B.
36.−Let P be a minor-closed graph property. Show that strengthening the
notion of a minor (for example, to that of topological minor) increases
the set of forbidden minors required to characterize P.
37.
Deduce from the graph minor theorem that every minor-closed property
can be expressed by forbidding ﬁnitely many topological minors. Is the
same true for every property that is closed under taking topological
minors?
Call a set X ✓V (G) of vertices k-connected in G if |X| > k and for all subsets
Y, Z ✓X with |Y | = |Z| 6 k there are |Y | disjoint Y –Z paths in G.
38.+ Show that the tree-width of a graph G is large if and only if it contains
a large set of vertices that is k-connected in G for some large k. For ex-
ample, show that graphs of tree-width < k contain no (k +1)-connected
set of 3k vertices, and that graphs containing no (k + 1)-connected set
of 3k vertices have tree-width < 4k.
39.
(continued)
(i)+ Find an N ! N2 function k 7! (h, `) such that every graph with an
`-connected set of h vertices contains a bramble of order > k.
(ii)−Using the last exercise, deduce the following weakening of the
diﬃcult implication of Theorem 12.4.3: given k, every graph of large
enough tree-width f(k) contains a bramble of order > k.
40.−Show that if separations r, s are nested, they have orientations ~r > ~s.
41.
Two cuts are nested if a side of one is contained in a side of the other.
Show that the k-cuts in a k-edge-connected graph are nested if k is odd.
42.
Characterize the 2-tangles in a graph.
43.
Find a 4-tangle in the 3-dimensional cube.
When ⌧is a tangle and (A, B) 2 ⌧, we call A the small side of {A, B} in ⌧
and B its big side.
44.
Let G be a graph with a tangle ⌧of order k.
(i) Show that every graph G0 < G also has a k-tangle.
(ii) Justify the notion of a ‘small side’ by showing that if (A, B) 2 ⌧
and {A0, B0} is a separation of order < k with A0 ✓A or B0 ◆B,
then (A0, B0) 2 ⌧.

Exercises
409
(iii) Deduce from the proﬁle property of ⌧that the intersection X of
the big sides of any star in ⌧contains at least k vertices.
(iv) Deduce that, for every set X of fewer than k vertices, exactly
one of the components C of G −X is ‘big’, in the sense that
(V (G −C), X [ V (C)) 2 ⌧.
45.+ Is (iv) of the previous exercise true also in inﬁnite graphs (with k ﬁnite)?
A decider set for a tangle ⌧in G is a set X ✓V (G) such that |X \A| < |X \B|
for every (A, B) 2 ⌧.
46.+ Show that a k-tangle induced by a 2k-tangle always has a decider set.
47.
Show that separations {A, B} and {C, D} cross if and only if both
A and B meet both C and D outside A \ B \ C \ D.
48.
Does every set of separations in a graph admit a consistent orientation?
49.
Show that for every consistent orientation O of the set N of the separa-
tions Se := {U1, U2} in Lemma 12.3.1, one for every edge e of T, there
exists a node t of T such that O orients every separation in N towards Vt.
50.−Show that orienting the edges of a tree T = (V, E) towards some ﬁxed
node t is consistent for the partial ordering on
!
E deﬁned in Section 12.5.
Is this a bijection between V and the consistent orientations of E?
51.
(continued)
Show that S-trees are just a formal way to display, by a concrete tree,
the ‘tree-like’ structure of nested sets of separations:
(i) Given an S-tree (T, ↵), show that ↵(
!
E(T)) ✓
!
S is nested.
(A set σ ✓
!
S is nested if { s |
!s
2 σ } is nested.)
(ii)+ Given a nested set S of separations, construct an S-tree (T, ↵)
with surjective ↵:
!
E(T) !
!
S .
(iii) Derive Exercise 16 (ii).
52.
(continued)
Prove the assertions about trees of tangles and tree-decompositions
made in the long paragraph following the proof of Theorem 12.5.8.
53.+ Show that in any graph of order n there are at most n tangles.
54.
Recall from the proof of Theorem 12.4.3 how a k-bramble orients Sk.
Is this orientation of Sk a tangle? Is it a proﬁle?
55.
Show the following implications for a graph G:
(i) G contains a k-block ) G has a bramble of order k.
(ii) G has a tangle of order k ) G has a bramble of order k.
(iii) G has a bramble of order 3k ) G has a tangle of order k.
(iv) G contains a k-block ) G has a k-tangle or |B| 6 3
2(k −1).
Is there a function f: N!N such that, for every k 2 N, if G has a tangle
of order at least f(k) then it contains a k-block?

410
12. Graph Minors
56.
Show that k-blocks of size at least 3k/2 deﬁne robust proﬁles of Sk.
Strengthen Theorem 12.3.7 for such blocks, to ﬁnd a canonical tree-
decomposition which, for variable k, eﬃciently distinguishes all pairs of
k-blocks of size at least 3k/2 such that neither includes the other.
57.+ Deﬁne as the order of a bipartition {A, B} of the vertex set of a graph G
the number kA, Bk of its A–B edges. Deﬁne orientations of such bipar-
titions in the obvious way. Call an orientation of the set of all the vertex
bipartitions of order < k an edge-tangle of order k if it has no three
elements (A1, B1), (A2, B2), (A3, B3) such that A1 [ A2 [ A3 = V (G).
Show that the proofs of Theorems 12.5.1 and 12.5.8 yield tree-of-tangle
theorems for edge tangles, the second of them canonical.
58.
Discuss the following three shortcuts in the proof of Theorem 12.5.11,
all designed to avoid shifting. Does any of them work?
(i) In the induction step, pick any separation s 2 Sk r SO of your
choice. (If you think it helps, choose it of minimum order.) Add
each of its two orientations
!s ,
 s to O to obtain Sk-trees that
are over T ⇤[ T + except at one leaf, whose label is {
 s} or {
!s },
respectively. Merge the trees at these leaves as in the text.
Does it worry you that the extensions of O are no longer closed upwards
in
−!
Sk? If so, why? Then try the following adaptations of (i):
(ii) Dispense with the requirement that O be closed upwards in
−!
Sk.
(iii) Add to O not just
!s or
 s, but their entire up-closure in
−!
Sk.
59.
To illustrate the equivalence of Theorems 12.4.3 and 12.5.11, prove the
following assertions for all graphs G:
(i) G has tree-width < k −1 if and only if it has an Sk-tree over Fk.
(ii) G has a k-bramble if and only if it admits an Fk-tangle of Sk.
60.+ Modify the proof of Theorem 12.5.9 to obtain a proof of Theorem 12.5.11.
61.
Extend Theorem 12.6.5 as follows.
Let H be a connected planar
graph, let X be any set of connected graphs including H, and let
H := { IX | X
2 X }.
Show that H has the Erd˝os-P´osa property,
witnessed by the same function f as deﬁned in the proof of Theorem
12.6.5. Explain how it is possible that f depends on H but not on any
of the other graphs in X.
62.+ Show that, for every non-planar graph H, the class IH fails to have
the Erd˝os-P´osa property.
(Hint. Embed H in a surface.)
63.+ Let H be a class of connected graphs, and k > 1 an integer. Without
using any theorems from this chapter, show that H has the Erd˝os-P´osa
property for graphs without a k-tangle.

Exercises
411
64.+ Show that the four ingredients to the structure of the graphs in
Forb4(Kn) as described in Theorem 12.6.6 – tree-decomposition, an
apex set X, arbitrary surfaces S 6 - Kn, and vortices H1, . . . , Hk – are
all needed to capture all the graphs in Forb4(Kn).
More precisely,
ﬁnd examples of graphs in Forb4(Kn) showing that Theorem 12.6.6
becomes false if we require in addition that the tree-decomposition has
only one part, or that X is always empty, or that S is always the sphere,
or that H1, . . . , Hk are always empty. No exact proofs are required.
65.+ (continued)
Show that, unlike in Theorem 12.6.6, the surfaces used in Theorem
12.6.7 cannot be limited to those in which Kn cannot be drawn. (As
before, no exact proofs are required.)
66.
Without using the graph minor theorem, show that the chromatic num-
ber of the graphs in any 4-antichain is bounded.
67.
Let Sg denote the orientable surface obtained from the sphere by adding
g handles. Find a lower bound for |KP(S)| in terms of g.
(Hint. The smallest g such that a given graph can be embedded in Sg
is its orientable genus. Use the theorem that the orientable genus of a
graph is equal to the sum of the genera of its blocks.)
68.
Deduce the graph minor theorem from the self-minor conjecture.
69.
Prove Theorem 12.6.9, assuming that G has a normal spanning tree.
70.
Let G be a locally ﬁnite graph obtained from the Z ⇥Z grid H by
adding an inﬁnite set of edges xy with dH(x, y) unbounded. Show that
G < K@0. Can you do the same if the distances dH(x, y) are bounded
(but at least 3)?
71.
Is the inﬁnite Z ⇥Z grid a minor of the Z ⇥N grid? Is the latter a
minor of the N ⇥N grid?
72.+ Extend Proposition 12.3.6 to inﬁnite graphs not containing an inﬁnite
complete subgraph.
73.
Using the previous exercise, prove that if every ﬁnite subgraph of G
has tree-width less than k 2 N then so does G.
74.
Show that no assumption of large ﬁnite connectivity can ensure that
a countable graph has a Kr minor when r > 5. However, using the
previous exercise show that suﬃciently large ﬁnite connectivity forces
an inﬁnite graph to contain any given planar minor.

412
12. Graph Minors
Notes
Robertson & Seymour have traditionally referred to the graph minor theorem
as Wagner’s conjecture. Wagner did indeed discuss this problem in the 1960s
with his then students, Halin and Mader, and it seems that Mader conjectured
a positive solution. Wagner himself always insisted that he did not – even after
the graph minor theorem had been proved.
Robertson & Seymour’s proof of the graph minor theorem is given in the
numbers IV–VII, IX–XII and XIV–XXII of their series of over 20 papers under
the common title of Graph Minors, most of which appeared in the Journal of
Combinatorial Theory, Series B, between 1983 and 2012. Of their theorems
cited in this chapter, Theorem 12.4.2 is from Graph Minors IV, Theorems
12.5.9 and 12.5.1 from Graph Minors X, Theorems 12.6.3 and 12.6.5 from
Graph Minors V, and Theorem 12.6.6 from Graph Minors XVI.
Kruskal’s theorem on the well-quasi-ordering of ﬁnite trees was ﬁrst pub-
lished in J.B. Kruskal, Well-quasi ordering, the tree theorem, and V´aszonyi’s
conjecture, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 95 (1960), 210–225.
Our proof is due
to Nash-Williams, who introduced the versatile proof technique of choosing a
‘minimal bad sequence’. This technique was also used in our proof of Higman’s
Lemma 12.1.3.
Nash-Williams generalized Kruskal’s theorem to inﬁnite graphs. This ex-
tension is much more diﬃcult than the ﬁnite case. Its proof introduces as a tool
the notion of better-quasi-ordering, a concept that has profoundly inﬂuenced
well-quasi-ordering theory.
The graph minor theorem is false for uncount-
able graphs; this was shown by R. Thomas, A counterexample to ‘Wagner’s
conjecture’ for inﬁnite graphs, Math. Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. 103 (1988), 55–
57. Whether or not the countable graphs are well-quasi-ordered as minors,
and whether the ﬁnite (or the countable) graphs are better-quasi-ordered as
minors, are related questions that remain wide open. Both are related also
to the self-minor conjecture.
This, too, was originally intended to include
graphs of arbitrary cardinality, but was disproved for uncountable graphs by
B. Oporowski, A counterexample to Seymour’s self-minor conjecture, J. Graph
Theory 14 (1990), 521–524.
Doubling all the edges of an cycle, and then subdividing every new edge
once, yields a graph which is incomparable under the topological minor re-
lation to any graph obtained in this way from a cycle of any other length.
This shows that the ﬁnite graphs are not well-quasi-ordered by the topological
minor relation; cf. Exercise 10. C.-H. Liu, Graph Structures and Well-Quasi-
Ordering, PhD thesis, Georgia Institute of Technology (2014), showed that
this example is essentially the only obstruction to well-quasi-ordering by the
topological minor relation: given any integer k, the ﬁnite graphs that do not
contain, as a topological minor, a graph obtained from a path P k in this way
are well-quasi-ordered as topological minors.
The notions of tree-decomposition and tree-width were ﬁrst introduced
(under di↵erent names) by R. Halin, S-functions for graphs, J. Geometry 8
(1976), 171–186. Among other things, Halin showed that grids can have ar-
bitrarily large tree-width. Robertson & Seymour reintroduced the two con-
cepts, apparently unaware of Halin’s paper, with direct reference to K. Wagner,
¨Uber eine Eigenschaft der ebenen Komplexe, Math. Ann. 114 (1937), 570–
