[문서 맥락]
책: Graph Theory / 저자: Reinhard Diestel
챕터: 12. Graph Minors
현재 소단원: 12.appendix-b Appendix B: Surfaces
직전 소단원: 「12.appendix-a Appendix A: Infinite sets」
[본문]
B
Surfaces
This appendix o↵ers a summary of background information about sur-
faces, as needed for an understanding of their role in the proof of the
graph minor theorem or the proof of the ‘general Kuratowski theorem’
for arbitrary surfaces given in Chapter 12.7. In order to be read at a
rigorous level it requires familiarity with some basic deﬁnitions of general
topology (such as of the product and the identiﬁcation topology), but
no more.
A surface, for the purpose of this book, is a compact connected1
surface
Hausdor↵topological space S in which every point has a neighbourhood
homeomorphic to the Euclidean plane R2. An arc, a circle, and a disc
arc
in S are subsets that are homeomorphic in the subspace topology to the
circle S1
real interval [0, 1], to the unit circle S1 = {x 2 R2 : kxk = 1}, and to
disc
the unit disc {x 2 R2 : kxk 6 1} or {x 2 R2 : kxk < 1}, respectively.
The components of a subset X of S are the equivalence classes of
component
points in X where two points are equivalent if they can be joined by an
arc in X. The surface S itself, being connected, has only one component.
The frontier of X is the set of all points y in S such that every
frontier
neighbourhood of y meets both X and S r X.
The frontier F of X
separates S r X from X: since X [ F is closed, every arc from S r X to
X has a ﬁrst point in X [ F, which must lie in F. A component of the
frontier of X that is a circle in S is a boundary circle of X. A boundary
boundary
circle
circle of a disc in S is said to bound that disc.
There is a fundamental theorem about surfaces, their classiﬁcation.
This says that, up to homeomorphism, every surface can be obtained
from the sphere S2 = {x 2 R3 : kxk = 1} by ‘adding ﬁnitely many han-
sphere S2
dles or ﬁnitely many crosscaps’, and that surfaces obtained by adding
di↵erent numbers of handles or crosscaps are distinct. We shall not need
the classiﬁcation theorem, but to form a picture let us see what the
1 Throughout this appendix, ‘connected’ means ‘arc-connected’.
423
R. Diestel, Graph Theory, Graduate Texts in Mathematics 173,  
© Reinhard Diestel, under licence (exclusive for the print edition) 2025
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-70107-2

424
Appendix B
above operations mean. To add a handle to a surface S, we remove two
handle
open discs whose closures in S are disjoint, and identify2 their boundary
circles with the circles S1 ⇥{0} and S1 ⇥{1} of a copy of S1 ⇥[0, 1]
disjoint from S. To add a crosscap, we remove one open disc, and then
crosscap
identify opposite points on its boundary circle in pairs.
In order to see that these operations do indeed give new surfaces,
we have to check that every identiﬁcation point ends up with a neigh-
bourhood homeomorphic to R2. To do this rigorously, let us ﬁrst look
at circles more generally.
A cylinder is the product space S1 ⇥[0, 1], or any space homeomor-
cylinder
phic to it. Its middle circle is the circle S1 ⇥{ 1
2}. A M¨obius strip is
any space homeomorphic to the product space [0, 1] ⇥[0, 1] after identi-
M¨obius
strip
ﬁcation of (1, y) with (0, 1 −y) for all y 2 [0, 1]. Its middle circle is the
set {(x, 1
2) | 0 < x < 1} [ {p}, where p is the point resulting from the
identiﬁcation of (1, 1
2) with (0, 1
2). It can be shown3 that every circle C
in a surface S is the middle circle of a suitable cylinder or M¨obius strip
strip neigh-
bourhood
N in S, which can be chosen small enough to avoid any given compact
subset of S r C. If this strip neighbourhood is a cylinder, then N r C
has two components and we call C two-sided; if it is a M¨obius strip, then
two-sided
N r C has only one component and we call C one-sided.
one-sided
Using small neighbourhoods inside a strip neighbourhood of the
(two-sided) boundary circle of the disc or discs we removed from S in
order to attach a crosscap or handle, one can show easily that both
operations do produce new surfaces.
Since S is connected, S r C cannot have more components than
N r C. If S r C has two components, we call C a separating circle in S;
separating
circle
if it has only one, then C is non-separating. While one-sided circles are
obviously non-separating, two-sided circles can be either separating or
non-separating. For example, the middle circle of a cylinder added to
S as a ‘handle’ is a two-sided non-separating circle in the new surface
obtained. When S0 is obtained from S by adding a crosscap in place of
a disc D, then every arc in S that runs half-way round the boundary
circle of D becomes a one-sided circle in S0.
The classiﬁcation theorem thus has the following corollary:
Lemma B.1. Every surface other than the sphere contains a non-
separating circle.
2 This is made precise by the identiﬁcation topology, whose formal deﬁnition can
be found in any topology book. Since S1 has two possible orientations, two copies of
S1 can be identiﬁed in two essentially di↵erent ways. The corresponding two ways of
adding a handle yield di↵erent new surfaces. For the classiﬁcation one only uses one
of these, the way that preserves the orientability of the surface (as in Figure B.1).
3 In principle, the strip neighbourhood N is constructed as in the proof of
Lemma 4.2.2, using the compactness of C. However since we are not in a piecewise
linear setting now, the construction is considerably more complicated.

Surfaces
425
We shall see below that, in a sense, our two examples of non-separating
circles are all there are: cutting a surface along any non-separating cir-
cle (and patching up the holes) will always produce a surface with fewer
handles or crosscaps.
An embedding G ,! S of a graph G in S is a map σ that maps the
embedding
vertices of G to distinct points in S and its edges xy to σ(x)–σ(y) arcs
σ: G ,! S
in S, so that no inner point of such an arc is the image of a vertex or
lies on another arc. We then write σ(G) for the union of all those points
and arcs in S. A face of G in S is a component of S r σ(G), and the
face
subgraph of G that σ maps to the frontier of this face is its boundary.
boundary
Note that while faces in the sphere are always discs (if G is connected),
in general they need not be.
One can prove that in every surface one can embed a suitable graph
so that every face becomes a disc.
The following general version of
Euler’s theorem 4.2.9 therefore applies to all surfaces:
Theorem B.2. (Euler characteristic)
For every surface S there exists an integer χ(S) such that whenever a
graph G with n vertices and m edges is embedded in S so that there are
` faces and every face is a disc, we have
n −m + ` = χ(S) .
This invariant χ of S is its Euler characteristic. For computational
simplicity we usually work instead with the derived invariant
"(S) := 2 −χ(S) ,
"(S)
the Euler genus of S, because χ is negative for most surfaces but " takes
Euler genus
its values in N (see below).
Perhaps the most striking feature of Euler’s theorem is that it works
with almost any graph embedded in S. This makes it easy to see how
the Euler genus is a↵ected by the addition of a handle or crosscap.
Indeed, let D and D0 be two open discs in S that we wish to remove
in order to attach a handle there. Let G be any graph embedded in S so
that every face is a disc. If necessary, shift G on S so that D and D0 each
lie inside a face, f and f 0, say. Add cycles C and C0 on the boundary
circles of D and D0, and join them by an edge to the old boundaries of
f and f 0, respectively. Then every face of the resulting graph is again a
disc, and D and D0 are among these. Now remove D and D0, and add a
handle with an additional C–C0 edge running along it. This operation
makes the new handle into one new face, which is a disc. It thus reduces
the total number of faces by 1 (since we lost D and D0 but gained the
new face on the handle) and increases the number of edges by 1, but
leaves the number of vertices unchanged. As a result, " grows by 2.

426
Appendix B
Similarly, replacing a disc D bounded by a cycle C ✓G with a
crosscap decreases the number of faces by 1 (since we lose D), but leaves
n −m unchanged if we arrange the cycle C in such a way that vertices
get identiﬁed with vertices when we identify opposite points.
We have thus shown the following:
Lemma B.3.
(i) Adding a handle to a surface raises its Euler genus by 2.
(ii) Adding a crosscap to a surface raises its Euler genus by 1.
⇤
Since the sphere has Euler genus 0 (Theorem 4.2.9), the classiﬁca-
tion theorem and Lemma B.3 tell us that " has all its values in N. We
may thus try to prove theorems about surfaces by induction on ". For
the induction step, we could simply undo the addition of a handle or
crosscap described earlier, cutting along the new non-separating circle
it produced (which runs around the new handle or ‘half-way’ around
the crosscap) and restoring the old surface by putting back the disc or
discs we removed. A problem with this is that we do not normally know
where on our surface this circle lies, say with respect to a given graph
embedded in it.
However, the genus-reducing cut-and-paste operation can be carried
out with any non-separating circle: we do not have to use one that we
know came from a new handle or crosscap. This is an example of a more
general technique known as surgery, and works as follows.
Let C be a non-separating circle in a surface S 6= S2. To cut S
along C, we form a new space S0 from S by replacing every point x 2 C
cutting
with two points x0, x00 and deﬁning the topology on the modiﬁed set
as follows.4
Let N be any strip neighbourhood of C in S, and put
X0 := {x0 | x 2 C} and X00 := {x00 | x 2 C}. If N is a cylinder, then
N r C has two components N 0 and N 00, and we choose the neighbour-
hoods of the new points x0 and x00 in S0 so that X0 and X00 become
boundary circles of N 0 and N 00 in S0, respectively, and N 0 [ X0 and
N 00 [ X00 become disjoint cylinders in S0. If N is a M¨obius strip, we
choose these neighbourhoods so that X0 and X00 each form an arc in S0
and X0 [X00 is a boundary circle of N rC in S0, with (N rC)[X0 [X00
forming one cylinder in S0. Finally, we turn S0 into a surface by capping
capping
its holes: for each of the (two or one) boundary circles X0 and X00 or
X0 [ X00 of S r C in S0 we take a disc disjoint from S0 and identify its
boundary circle with X0, X00 or X0 [ X00, respectively, so that the space
obtained is again a surface.
4 The description that follows may sound complicated, but it is not: working in
our concrete models of the cylinder and the M¨obius strip it is easy to write down
explicit neighbourhood bases that deﬁne a topology with the properties stated. As all
we want is to obtain some surface of smaller genus, we do not care about uniqueness
(which will follow anyhow from Lemma B.4 and the classiﬁcation).

Surfaces
427
Computing how these operations a↵ect the Euler genus of S is again
easy, assuming we can embed a graph in S so that every face is a disc and
C is the image of a cycle. (This can always be done, but it is not easy
to prove.5) Indeed, by doubling C we left n −m unchanged, because a
cycle has the same number of vertices as edges. So all we changed was `,
which increased by 2 in the ﬁrst case and by 1 in the second.
Lemma B.4. Let C be any non-separating circle in a surface S, and let
S0 be obtained from S by cutting along C and capping the hole or holes.
(i) If C is one-sided in S, then "(S0) = "(S) −1.
(ii) If C is two-sided in S, then "(S0) = "(S) −2.
⇤
Lemma B.4 gives us a large supply of circles to cut along in an
induction on the Euler genus. Still, it is sometimes more convenient to
cut along a separating circle, and many of these can be used too:
Lemma B.5. Let C be a separating circle in a surface S, and let S0 and
S00 be the two surfaces obtained from S by cutting along C and capping
the holes. Then
"(S) = "(S0) + "(S00) .
In particular, if C does not bound a disc in S, both S0 and S00 have
smaller Euler genus than S.
Proof. As before, embed a graph G in S so that every face is a disc and
C is the image of a cycle in G, and let G0 ,! S0 and G00 ,! S00 be the
two graphs obtained in the surgery. Thus, G0 and G00 both contain a
copy of the cycle on C, which we assume to have k vertices and edges.
Then, with the obvious notation, we have
"(S0) + "(S00) = (2 −n0 + m0 −`0) + (2 −n00 + m00 −`00)
= 4 −(n + k) + (m + k) −(` + 2)
= 2 −n + m −`
= "(S) .
Now if S0 (say) is a sphere, then S0 \ S was a disc in S bounded by C.
Hence, if C does not bound a disc in S then "(S0) and "(S00) are both
non-zero, giving the second statement of the lemma.
⇤
We now apply these techniques to prove a lemma for our direct
proof in Chapter 12 of the ‘Kuratowski theorem for arbitrary surfaces’,
Corollary 12.7.3.
5 Perhaps the simplest proof was given by C. Thomassen, The Jordan-Schoenﬂies
theorem and the classiﬁcation of surfaces, Amer. Math. Monthly 99 (1992), 116–130.

428
Appendix B
Lemma B.6. Let S be a surface, and let C be a ﬁnite set of disjoint
[12.7.4]
circles in S. Assume that S r S C has a component D0 whose closure
in S meets every circle in C, and that no circle in C bounds a disc in S
that is disjoint from D0. Then "(S) > |C|.
Proof. We begin with the observation that the closure of D0 not only
meets but even contains every circle C
2 C.
This is because C has
a strip neighbourhood N disjoint from all the other circles in C (since
their union is compact), and each of the (one or two) components of
N r C has all of C in its closure. Since D0 meets, and hence contains,
at least one component of N r C, its closure contains C.
Let us partition C as C = C1 [ C1
2 [ C2
2, where the circles in C1 are
C1, C1
2, C2
2
one-sided, those in C1
2 are two-sided but non-separating, and those in C2
2
are separating. We shall, in turn, cut along all the circles in C1, some |C2
2|
non-separating circles not in C, and at least half the circles in C1
2. This
will give us a sequence S0, . . . , Sn of surfaces, where S0 = S, and Si+1
S0, . . . , Sn
is obtained from Si by cutting along a circle Ci and capping the hole(s).
Ci
Our task will be to ensure that Ci is non-separating in Si for every
i = 0, . . . , n −1. Then Lemma B.4 will imply that "(Si+1) 6 "(Si) −1
for all i and "(Si+1) 6 "(Si) −2 whenever Ci 2 C1
2, giving
"(S) > "(Sn) + |C1| + |C2
2| + 2 |C1
2|/2 > |C|
as desired.
C0
9
C1
C2
D0
C3
C4
C5
C6
C7
C8
C9
Fig. B.1. Cutting the 1-sided circle C1 and the 2-sided circles
C2, C3 and C5, C7, C8 and C0
9 does not separate S
Cutting along the circles in C1 (and capping the holes) is straightfor-
ward: since these circles are one-sided, they are always non-separating.
Next, we consider the circles in C2
2, such as C9 in Figure B.1. For
every C 2 C2
2, denote by D(C) the component of S r C that does not
contain D0. Since every circle in C lies in the closure of D0 but no point

Surfaces
429
of D(C) does, these D(C) are also components of S r S C. In particu-
lar, they are disjoint for di↵erent C. Thus, each D(C) will also be a
component of Si r C, where Si is the current surface after any surgery
performed on the circles in C1 and inside D(C0) for some C0 6= C. Given
a ﬁxed circle C 2 C2
2, let S0 be the surface obtained from D(C) by capping
its hole. Since C does not bound a disc in S that is disjoint from D0,
we know that S0 is not a sphere and hence contains a non-separating
circle C0 (Lemma B.1). We choose C0 so that it avoids the cap we added
to form S0, i.e. so that C0 ✓S rC. Then C0 is also non-separating in the
current surface Si (since every point of Si r C0 can be joined by an arc
in Si rC0 to C, which is connected), and we may select C0 as a circle Ci
to cut along.
It remains to select at least half of the circles in C1
2 as circles Ci to
cut along. We begin by selecting all those whose entire strip neighbour-
hoods (i.e., both their ‘sides’) lie in D0. (In Figure B.1, these are the
circles C2 and C3.) These circles C are non-separating also in the surface
Si current before they are cut, because D0 will lie inside a component
of Si r C. Every other C 2 C1
2 lies in the closure also of a component
D(C) 6= D0 of S rS C. (In Figure B.1, these are the circles C4, . . . , C8.)
For every component D of S r S C we select all but one of the circles
C 2 C1
2 with D(C) = D as a cutting circle Ci. Clearly, each of these
Ci will be non-separating also in its current surface Si, and their total
number at least |C1
2|/2.
⇤

Hints for all the
Exercises
At this point in the book there used to be a collection of hints for all
the exercises. Their intention was to help those who had already spent
some time over an exercise but somehow failed to make progress, by
putting them on the right track. In order to not spoil the fun of an
exercise, or its usability in class, I tried to design these hints so as to
make them somewhat unintelligible to those that had not made such an
initial attempt of their own.
However, this is a tricky brief, and in some cases the hints will
invariably still give away some key ideas, or narrow a student’s mind in
pursuit of alternatives. It therefore seemed best to leave the decision of
which hints to include to the lecturer setting the problems.
The Hints section, of 35 pages, now lives in the Professional eBook
edition only. This is available to lecturers and professional mathemati-
cians via
http://diestel-graph-theory.com/
and, for iPad users, from the book’s dedicated iOS app, Graph Theory.
I apologize to those readers that are using the book for self-study
and would have liked a peek at a hint every now and then too. . .
431
R. Diestel, Graph Theory, Graduate Texts in Mathematics 173,  
© Reinhard Diestel, under licence (exclusive for the print edition) 2025
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-70107-2
