[문서 맥락]
책: Lectures on Polytopes / 저자: Günter M. Ziegler
챕터: 0. Introduction and Examples
현재 소단원: 0.intro 개관 (챕터 도입부) (분할 part 1)
[본문]
0
Introduction and Examples
Convex polytopes are fundamental geometric objects: to a large extent the
geometry of polytopes is just that of Rd itself. (In the following, the letter d
usually denotes dimension.)
The “classic text” on convex polytopes by Branko Gr¨unbaum [252] has
recently celebrated its twenty-ﬁfth anniversary — and is still inspiring read-
ing. Some more recent books, concentrating on f-vector questions, are
McMullen & Shephard [403], Brøndsted [133], and Yemelichev, Kovalev
& Kravtsov [570]. See also Stanley [515] and Hibi [274]. For very recent
developments, some excellent surveys are available, notably the handbook
articles by Klee & Kleinschmidt [329] and by Bayer & Lee [63]. See also
Ewald [201] for a lot of interesting material, and Croft, Falconer & Guy [168]
for more research problems.
Our aim is the following: rather than being encyclopedic, we try to
present an introduction to some basic methods and modern tools of poly-
tope theory, together with some highlights (mostly with proofs) of the
theory. The fact that we can start from scratch and soon reach some ex-
citing points is due to recent progress on several aspects of the theory that
is unique in its simplicity. For example, there are several striking papers
by Gil Kalai (see Lecture 3!) that are short, novel, and probably instant
classics. (They are also slightly embarrassing, pointing us to “obvious” (?)
ideas that have long been overlooked.)
For these lectures we concentrate on combinatorial aspects of polytope
theory. Of course, much of our geometric intuition is derived from life in R3
(which some of us might mistake for the “real world,” with disastrous
results, as everybody should know). However, here is a serious warning:
 G.M. Ziegler, Lectures on Polytopes, Graduate Texts in Mathematics 152, 
1
  
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4613-8431-1_1, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2007 
 

2
0. Introduction and Examples
part of the work (and fun) consists in seeing how intuition from life in
three dimensions can lead one (i.e., everyone, but not us) astray: there are
many theorems about 3-dimensional polytopes whose analogues in higher
dimensions fail badly. Thus, one of the main tasks for polytope theory is
to develop tools to analyze and, if possible, “visualize” the geometry of
higher-dimensional polytopes. Schlegel diagrams, Gale diagrams, and the
Lawrence construction are prominent tools in this direction — tools for a
more solid analysis of what polytopes in d-space “really look like.”
Notation 0.0.
We stick to some special notational conventions. They are
designed in such a way that all the expressions we write down are “clearly”
invariant under change of coordinates.
In the following Rd represents the vector space of all column vectors of
length d with real entries. Similarly, (Rd)∗denotes the dual vector space,
that is, the real vector space of all linear functions Rd −→R. These are
given by the real row vectors of length d.
The symbols x, x0, x1, . . . , y, z always denote column vectors in Rd (or
in Rd±1) and represent (aﬃne) points. Matrices X, Y, Z, . . . represent sets
of column vectors; thus they are usually (d × m)- or (d × n)-matrices. The
order of the columns is not important for such a set of column vectors.
Also, we need the unit vectors ei in Rd, which are column vectors, and
the column vectors 0 and 1 = P
i ei of all zeroes, respectively all ones.
The symbols a, a0, a1, . . . , b, c, . . . always denote row vectors in (Rd)∗,
and represent linear forms. In fact, the row vector a ∈(Rd)∗represents the
linear form ℓ= ℓa : Rd −→R, x 7−→ax. Here ax is the scalar obtained as
the matrix product of a row vector (i.e., a (1 × d)-matrix) with a column
vector (a (d × 1)-matrix). Matrices like A, A′, B, . . . represent a set of row
vectors; thus they are usually (n × d)- or (m × d)-matrices. Furthermore,
the order of the rows is not important.
We use 1l = (1, . . . , 1) to denote the all-ones row vector in (Rd)∗, or
in (Rd±1)∗. Thus, 1lx is the sum of the coordinates of the column vector x.
Similarly, O = (0, . . . , 0) denotes the all-zeroes row vector.
Boldface type is reserved for vectors; scalars appear as italic symbols,
such as a, b, c, d, x, y . . .. Thus the coordinates of a column vector x will be
x1, . . . , xd ∈R, and the coordinates of a row vector a will be a1, . . . , ad.
Basic objects for any discussion of geometry are points, lines, planes and
so forth, which are aﬃne subspaces, also called ﬂats. Among them, the
vector subspaces of Rd (which contain the origin 0 ∈Rd) are referred to as
linear subspaces. Thus the nonempty aﬃne subspaces are the translates of
linear subspaces.
The dimension of an aﬃne subspace is the dimension of the corresponding
linear vector space. Aﬃne subspaces of dimensions 0, 1, 2, and d −1 in Rd
are called points, lines, planes, and hyperplanes, respectively.
For these lectures we need no special mathematical requirements: we just
assume that the listener/reader feels (at least a little bit) at home in the

0. Introduction and Examples
3
real aﬃne space Rd, with the construction of coordinates, and with aﬃne
maps x 7−→Ax + x0, which represent an aﬃne change of coordinates if A
is a nonsingular square matrix, or an arbitrary aﬃne map in the general
case.
Most of what we do will, in fact, be invariant under any aﬃne change
of coordinates. In particular, the precise dimension of the ambient space is
usually not really important. If we usually consider “a d-polytope in Rd,”
then the reason is that this feels more concrete than any description starting
with “Let V be a ﬁnite-dimensional aﬃne space over an ordered ﬁeld,
and . . . .”
We take for granted the fact that aﬃne subspaces can be described by
aﬃne equations, as the aﬃne image of some real vector space Rk, or as the
set of all aﬃne combinations of a ﬁnite set of points,
F = {x ∈Rd : x = λ0x0 + . . . + λnxn for λi ∈R,
n
X
i=1
λi = 1}.
That is, every aﬃne subspace can be described both as an intersection of
aﬃne hyperplanes, and as the aﬃne hull of a ﬁnite point set (i.e., as the
intersection of all aﬃne ﬂats that contain the set). A set of n ≥0 points is
aﬃnely independent if its aﬃne hull has dimension n −1, that is, if every
proper subset has a smaller aﬃne hull.
A point set K ⊆Rd is convex if with any two points x, y ∈K it also
contains the straight line segment [x, y] = {λx + (1 −λ)y : 0 ≤λ ≤1}
between them. For example, in the drawings below the shaded set on the
right is convex, the set on the left is not. (This is one of very few nonconvex
sets in this book.)
Clearly, every intersection of convex sets is convex, and Rd itself is convex.
Thus for any K ⊆Rd, the “smallest” convex set containing K, called the
convex hull of K, can be constructed as the intersection of all convex sets
that contain K:
conv(K) :=
\ 
K′ ⊆Rd : K ⊆K′, K′ convex
	
.
Our sketch shows a subset K of the plane (in black), and its convex hull
conv(K), a convex 7-gon (including the shaded part).

4
0. Introduction and Examples
For any ﬁnite set {x1, . . . , xk} ⊆K and parameters λ1, . . . , λk ≥0 with
λ1 + . . . + λk = 1, the convex hull conv(K) must contain the point λ1x1 +
. . . + λkxk: this can be seen by induction on k, using
λ1x1 + . . . + λkxk = (1 −λk)

λ1
1 −λk
x1 + . . . + λk−1
1 −λk
xk−1

+ λkxk
for λk < 1. For example, the following sketch shows the lines spanned by
four points in the plane, and the convex hull (shaded).
Geometrically, this says that with any ﬁnite subset K0 ⊆K the convex
hull conv(K) must also contain the projected simplex spanned by K0. This
proves the inclusion “⊇” of
conv(K) =

λ1x1 + . . . + λkxk : {x1, . . . , xk} ⊆K, λi ≥0,
k
X
i=1
λi = 1
	
.
But the right-hand side of this equation is easily seen to be convex, which
proves the equality.
Now if K = {x1, . . . , xn} ⊆Rd is itself ﬁnite, then we see that its convex
hull is
conv(K) =

λ1x1 + . . . + λnxn : n ≥1, λi ≥0,
n
X
i=1
λi = 1
	
.
The following gives two diﬀerent versions of the deﬁnition of a polytope.
(We follow Gr¨unbaum and speak of polytopes without including the word
“convex”: we do not consider nonconvex polytopes in this book.) The two
versions are mathematically — but not algorithmically — equivalent. The
proof of equivalence between the two concepts is nontrivial, and will occupy
us in Lecture 1.
Deﬁnition 0.1.
A V-polytope is the convex hull of a ﬁnite set of points
in some Rd.
An H-polyhedron is an intersection of ﬁnitely many closed halfspaces in
some Rd. An H-polytope is an H-polyhedron that is bounded in the sense
that it does not contain a ray {x + ty : t ≥0} for any y̸ = 0.
(This
deﬁnition of “bounded” has the advantage over others that it does not rely
on a metric or scalar product, and that it is obviously invariant under aﬃne
change of coordinates.)

0. Introduction and Examples
5
A polytope is a point set P ⊆Rd which can be presented either as a
V-polytope or as an H-polytope.
The dimension of a polytope is the dimension of its aﬃne hull.
A d-polytope is a polytope of dimension d in some Re (e ≥d).
Two polytopes P ⊆Rd and Q ⊆Re are aﬃnely isomorphic, denoted
by P ∼= Q, if there is an aﬃne map f : Rd −→Re that is a bijection
between the points of the two polytopes. (Note that such a map need not
be injective or surjective on the “ambient spaces.”)
Our sketches try to illustrate the two concepts: the left ﬁgure shows a
pentagon constructed as a V-polytope as the convex hull of ﬁve points; the
right ﬁgure shows the same pentagon as an H-polytope, constructed by
intersecting ﬁve lightly shaded halfspaces (bounded by the ﬁve fat lines).
Usually we assume (without loss of generality) that the polytopes we
study are full-dimensional, so that d denotes both the dimension of the
polytope we are studying, and the dimension of the ambient space Rd.
The emphasis of these lectures is on combinatorial properties of the faces
of polytopes: the intersections with hyperplanes for which the polytope is
entirely contained in one of the two halfspaces determined by the hyper-
plane. We will give precise deﬁnitions and characterizations of faces of
polytopes in the next two lectures. For the moment, we rely on intuition
from “life in low dimensions”: using the fact that we know quite well what
a 2- or 3-polytope “looks like.” We consider the polytope itself as a trivial
face; all other faces are called proper faces. Also the empty set is a face for
every polytope. Less trivially, one has as faces the vertices of the polytope,
which are single points, the edges, which are 1-dimensional line segments,
and the facets, i.e., the maximal proper faces, whose dimension is one less
than that of the polytope itself.
We deﬁne two polytopes P, Q to be combinatorially equivalent (and de-
note this by P ≃Q) if there is a bijection between their faces that preserves
the inclusion relation. This is the obvious, nonmetric concept of equiva-
lence that only considers the combinatorial structure of a polytope; see
Section 2.2 for a thorough discussion.
Example 0.2. Zero-dimensional polytopes are points, one-dimensional
polytopes are line segments. Thus any two 0-polytopes are aﬃnely iso-
morphic, as are any two 1-polytopes.

6
0. Introduction and Examples
Two-dimensional polytopes are called polygons. A polygon with n ver-
tices is called an n-gon. Convexity here requires that the interior angles (at
the vertices) are all smaller than π. The following drawing shows a convex
6-gon, or hexagon.
Two 2-polytopes are combinatorially equivalent if and only if they have
the same number of vertices. Therefore, we can use the term “the convex
n-gon” for the combinatorial equivalence class of a convex 2-polytope with
exactly n vertices. There is, in fact, a nice representative for this class: the
regular n-gon,
P2(n) := conv

(cos( 2πk
n ), sin( 2πk
n )) : 0 ≤k < n
	
⊆R2.
The following drawing shows the regular hexagon P2(6) in R2. It is com-
binatorially equivalent, but not aﬃnely isomorphic, to the hexagon drawn
above.
x
y
Example 0.3. The tetrahedron is a familiar geometric object (a 3-dimen-
sional polytope) in R3:
Similarly, its d-dimensional generalization forms the ﬁrst (and simplest)
inﬁnite family of higher-dimensional polytopes we want to consider. We

0. Introduction and Examples
7
deﬁne a d-simplex as the convex hull of any d + 1 aﬃnely independent
points in some Rn (n ≥d).
Thus a d-simplex is a polytope of dimension d with d + 1 vertices. Nat-
urally the various possible notations for the d-simplex lead to confusion,
in particular since various authors of books and papers have their own, in-
consistent ideas about whether a lower index denotes dimension or number
of vertices. In the following, we consistently use lower indices to denote
dimension of a polytope (which should account for our awkward P2(n) for
an n-gon. . . ).
It is easy to see that any two d-simplices are aﬃnely isomorphic. However,
it is often convenient to specify a canonical model. For the d-simplex, we
use the standard d-simplex ∆d with d + 1 vertices in Rd+1,
∆d :=
n
x ∈Rd+1 : 1l x = 1, xi ≥0
o
= conv{e1, . . . , ed+1}
Our ﬁgures illustrate the construction of ∆2 in R3:
z
y
x
z
y
x
Example 0.4. The three-dimensional cube C3 and the octahedron C3∆are
familiar objects as well:
Their generalization to d dimensions is straightforward. We arrive at the
d-dimensional hypercube (or the d-cube, for short):
Cd := {x ∈Rd : −1 ≤xi ≤1} = conv

{+1, −1}d},

8
0. Introduction and Examples
and the d-dimensional crosspolytope:
Cd
∆:= {x ∈Rd :
X
i
|xi| ≤1} = conv{e1, −e1, . . . , ed, −ed}.
We have chosen our “standard models” in such a way that they are
symmetric with respect to the origin. In this version there is a very close
connection between the two polytopes Cd and Cd∆: they satisfy
Cd
∆
∼=
{a ∈(Rd)∗: ax ≤1 for all x ∈Cd }
Cd
∼=
{a ∈(Rd)∗: ax ≤1 for all x ∈Cd
∆},
that is, these two polytopes are polar to each other (see Section 2.3).
Now it is easy to see that the d-dimensional crosspolytope is a simplicial
polytope, all of whose proper faces are simplices, that is, every facet has
the minimal number of d vertices. Similarly, the d-dimensional hypercube
is a simple polytope: every vertex is contained in the minimal number of
only d facets.
These two classes, simple and simplicial polytopes, are very important. In
fact, the convex hull of any set of points that are in general position in Rd
is a simplicial polytope. Similarly, if we consider any set of inequalities
in Rd that are generic (i.e., they deﬁne hyperplanes in general position)
and whose intersection is bounded, then this deﬁnes a simple polytope.
Finally the two concepts are linked by polarity: if P and P ∆are polar,
then one is simple if and only if the other one is simplicial.
(The terms “general position” and “generic” are best handled with some
amount of ﬂexibility — you supply a precise deﬁnition only when it becomes
clear how much “general position” or “genericity” is really needed. One can
even speak of “suﬃciently general position”! For our purposes, it is usually
suﬃcient to require the following: a set of n > d points in Rd is in general
position if no d + 1 of them lie on a common aﬃne hyperplane. Similarly, a
set of n > d inequalities is generic if no point satisﬁes more than d of them
with equality. More about this in Section 3.1.)
Here is one more aspect that makes the d-cubes and d-crosspolytopes
remarkable: they are regular polytopes — polytopes with maximal symme-
try. (We will not give a precise deﬁnition here.) There is an extensive and
very beautiful theory of regular polytopes, which includes a complete clas-
siﬁcation of all regular and semi-regular polytopes in all dimensions. A lot
can be learned from the combinatorics and the geometry of these highly
regular conﬁgurations (“wayside shrines at which one should worship on
the way to higher things,” according to Peter McMullen).
At home (so to speak) in 3-space, the classiﬁcation of regular polytopes
yields the well-known ﬁve platonic solids: the tetrahedron, cube and oc-
tahedron, dodecahedron and icosahedron. We do not include here a draw-
ing of the icosahedron or the dodecahedron, but we refer the reader to

0. Introduction and Examples
9
Gr¨unbaum’s article [257] for an amusing account of how diﬃcult it is to
get a correct drawing (and a “How to” as well).
The classic account of regular polytopes is Coxeter’s book [164]; see also
Martini [379, 380], Blind & Blind [103], and McMullen & Schulte [404] for
recent progress. The topic is interesting not only for “aesthetic” reasons,
but also because of its close relationship to other parts of mathematics,
such as crystallography (see Senechal [491]), the theory of ﬁnite reﬂection
groups (“Coxeter groups,” see Grove & Benson [249] or Humphreys [289]),
and root systems and buildings (see Brown [135]), among others.
Example 0.5. There are a few simple but very useful recycling operations
that produce “new polytopes from old ones.”
If P is a d-polytope and x0 is a point outside the aﬃne hull of P (for
this we embed P into Rn for some n > d), then the convex hull
pyr(P) := conv(P ∪{x0})
is a (d + 1)-dimensional polytope called the pyramid over P. Clearly the
aﬃne and combinatorial type of pyr(P) does not depend on the particular
choice of x0 — just change the coordinate system. The faces of pyr(P) are
the faces of P itself, and all the pyramids over faces of P.
Especially familiar examples of pyramids are the simplices (the pyra-
mid over ∆d is ∆d+1), and the Egyptian pyramid Pyr3 = pyr(P2(4)): the
pyramid over a square.
Similarly we construct the bipyramid bipyr(P) by choosing two points x+
and x−outside aﬀ(P) such that an interior point of the segment [x+, x−]
is an interior point of P. As examples, we get the bipyramid over a triangle
x−
x+
and the crosspolytopes, which are iterated bipyramids over a point,
bipyr(Cd
∆) = Cd+1
∆.
Especially important, it is quite obvious how to deﬁne the product of two
(or more) polytopes: for this we consider polytopes P ⊆Rp and Q ⊆Rq,

10
0. Introduction and Examples
and set
P×Q
:=
{
x
y

: x ∈P, y ∈Q}.
We get a polytope of dimension dim(P) + dim(Q), whose nonempty faces
are the products of nonempty faces of P and nonempty faces of Q.
In particular
• The prism over a polytope P is the product of P with a segment,
prism(P)
:=
P×∆1.
This is polar to the bipyramid:
prism(P)
=
(bipyr(P ∆))∆.
The smallest interesting prism is the one over a triangle, ∆2 × ∆1,
also known as the triangular prism.
• The cubes can be interpreted as iterated prisms, starting with a point.
In particular, we get Cd×[−1, 1] = Cd+1.
• Products of simplices are interesting polytopes and more complicated
than one might think (see Problem 5.3(iii)*, an unsolved conjecture).
Just consider P := ∆2×∆2, the product of two triangles. This is a
4-polytope with 9 vertices. It has 6 facets, of the form “edge of one
triangle × the other triangle”: thus they all are triangular prisms.
Furthermore, the intersection of two of them is either “one of the
triangles × a vertex of the other triangle,” or it is “an edge × an
edge.” In either case the intersection is 2-dimensional. Hence any two
facets of P are adjacent, and P ∆= (∆2 × ∆2)∆is a 4-polytope with
6 vertices such that any two of them are adjacent. Thus P ∆is a
2-neighborly 4-polytope that is not a simplex: there is no analogue to
this “phenomenon” in 3-space (Exercise 0.0).
• Taking products of several convex polygons, we can construct poly-
topes “with many vertices.” Namely, assuming that d is even, we can
construct a d
2-fold product of m-gons, which yields a d-dimensional
polytope with “only” dm
2
facets, but with md/2 vertices. If d is odd,
we can use a prism over such a product.
(For ﬁxed dimension d, this simple construction of polytopes with
many vertices is asymptotically optimal, as we will see in Section 8.4.)

0. Introduction and Examples
11
Example 0.6. The moment curve in Rd is deﬁned by
x : R −→Rd,
t 7−→x(t) :=




t
t2
...
td



∈Rd.
The cyclic polytope Cd(t1, . . . , tn) is the convex hull
Cd(t1, . . . , tn) := conv {x(t1), x(t2), . . . , x(tn)}
of n > d distinct points x(ti), with t1 < t2 . . . < tn, on the moment
curve. We will see from “Gale’s evenness condition” ahead that the points
x(ti) are vertices, and the combinatorial equivalence class of the polytope
does not depend on the speciﬁc choice of the parameters ti. This justiﬁes
denoting the polytope by Cd(n) and calling it “the” cyclic d-polytope with
n vertices. Our drawing shows C3(6).
x(t1)
x(t2)
x(t3)
x(t4)
x(t5)
x(t6)
The problem is that in dimension 3 we cannot really see why cyclic
polytopes are so interesting. They are. Before we prove a few things about
them, let’s do some “experiments.”
We use the program “PORTA” by Thomas Christof [150, 151], which
produces a complete system of facet-deﬁning inequalities from the list of
vertices. Let’s do the 4-dimensional cyclic polytope C4(8). We use param-
eters ti = i −1 for 1 ≤i ≤8. The input ﬁle for PORTA is
DIM = 4
CONV_SECTION
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
2
4
8
16
3
9
27
81
4 16
64
256
5 25 125
625
6 36 216 1296
7 49 343 2401
END
