[문서 맥락]
책: Lectures on Polytopes / 저자: Günter M. Ziegler
챕터: 4. Steinitz' Theorem for 3-Polytopes
현재 소단원: 4.1 3-Connected Planar Graphs
직전 소단원: 「3.ex Problems and Exercises」
[본문]
4
Steinitz’ Theorem for 3-Polytopes
The combinatorial structure of 2-polytopes is not much of a mystery. For an
illustrated journey into the wonderful world of 3-dimensional convex (and
nonconvex) polyhedra, we direct the reader’s attention to the conference
volume [492]. See also Barnette’s book [45] for a nice elementary discussion
of combinatorics and graph theory related to convex 3-polytopes.
In this lecture we will establish the basic theory for 3-polytopes, by
proving Steinitz’ theorem. The basic version reads as follows.
Theorem 4.1 (Steinitz’ theorem).
[524, 527]
G is the graph of a 3-dimensional polytope if and only if it is simple, planar,
and 3-connected.
Polytopal graphs are certainly simple: they have no loops or multiple
edges. The graph G(P) is planar for every 3-polytope (use radial projec-
tion to a sphere from an interior point, or a linear projection to a plane
from a point beyond a facet). Also, G(P) is 3-connected by Balinski’s Theo-
rem 3.14. Thus, the diﬃcult part is the “if” part of the theorem: it requires
that we show how, given a 3-connected planar graph, one can construct a
3-polytope.
 G.M. Ziegler, Lectures on Polytopes, Graduate Texts in Mathematics 152,   
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4613-8431-1_5, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2007 
 
103

104
4. Steinitz’ Theorem for 3-Polytopes
Here are four observations to indicate to this claim is nontrivial:
1. No similar theorem is known, and it seems that no similarly eﬀective
theorem is possible, in higher dimensions.
2. There are lots of interesting consequences and various strengthenings
that follow by the same proof technique (see Section 4.4).
3. Many of the higher-dimensional analogues of these strengthenings are
false (we’ll see this in Lectures 5 and 6).
4. There is no extremely simple proof known.
All the combinatorial (“classical”) proofs of Steinitz’ theorem [524] [527,
§§54,63] [252, Sect. 13.1] [51] basically follow the same pattern: arguing
that every 3-connected planar graph can be “built up” from K4 by some
well-deﬁned operations, which preserve realizability. (See the notes at the
end of this lecture for a diﬀerent, “nonlinear” line of reasoning.)
The reason why we can give a “nicer than usual” combinatorial proof
here is that we will be more elegant in dealing with the graph theory:
using Truemper’s clever treatment [546, 547] of “∆Y reductions.” This will
be done in the next three sections of this lecture, which together imply
Theorem 4.1.
– In Section 4.1, we discuss the little graph theory we need, concentrat-
ing on 3-connected graphs and ∆Y reductions.
– In Section 4.2, we prove that Steinitz’ theorem is true for 3-connected
planar graphs which have a “∆Y reduction.”
– In Section 4.3, we show that if a 3-connected planar graph G has a
∆Y reduction, then so does every minor of G.
– Finally, we show that every planar graph is a minor of a grid graph,
and every grid graph has a ∆Y reduction.
We close the lecture in Section 4.4 with a list of strengthenings, extensions,
and corollaries of Steinitz’ theorem.
4.1
3-Connected Planar Graphs
Again we need some basic graph theory. Let us, for a while, admit nonsimple
graphs as well, that is, graphs that can have loops and parallel edges.
Such a graph G is connected if there is a path between any two distinct
vertices of G. All the graphs we consider will be connected.
A graph G with at least 2 edges is 2-connected if it is connected, has
no loops, and cannot be disconnected by removing one vertex and all the

4.1 3-Connected Planar Graphs
105
edges incident with it. A graph G with at least 4 edges is 3-connected if it
is simple and cannot be disconnected by removing 1 or 2 vertices from G.
Under this deﬁnition, the smallest 2-connected graph is the graph C2 with
two parallel edges
and the smallest 3-connected graph is K4,
the complete graph with 4 vertices and 6 edges.
The reason for this version of the deﬁnitions is that it is invariant under
duality. That is, if we embed a graph into the sphere S2 and draw the
dual graph G∗, then G is k-connected if and only if G∗is k-connected (for
k = 2, 3). We do not review the construction of a dual graph here, but trust
that the following picture — which you may interpret as being drawn in
the plane, or on the 2-sphere — explains it all.
At this point, observe that the combinatorial structure of a 3-polytope
is completely determined by its graph — this is a special case of a fact
we noted in Remark 3.13(2). It follows from Whitney’s theorem [564] that
the embedding of a 3-connected planar graph into the sphere is unique.
To prove it, note that for every 3-connected planar graph the regions of
an embedding are bounded by chordless cycles that do not separate the
graph. Any other cycle has more than one region on either of its sides, so
either the cycle has a chord, or it separates two vertices, or both. Note that
Perles’ question of Problem 3.13∗asks for a higher-dimensional version of
Whitney’s theorem.

106
4. Steinitz’ Theorem for 3-Polytopes
Two very basic “local” operations on graphs are the deletion of edges
and the contraction of edges,
for which the two vertices of the edge are identiﬁed. Any graph that can
be obtained from G by a sequence of deletions and contractions of edges
is called a minor of G. Note that the edges of a minor can be viewed as a
subset of the edge set of G.
A special case occurs if we contract only edges that are in series with oth-
ers, being adjacent to a vertex of degree 2 (this is equivalent to “removing
a subdivision point”)
f
f
e
or delete edges that are in parallel with others (this is the usual operation
for “making a graph simple”).
f
f
e
We will refer to any sequence of such operations as series-parallel reduc-
tions, or SP reductions.
A Delta-Wye operation, or ∆Y operation, replaces a triangle that bounds
a face (i.e., a nonseparating triangle) by a 3-star that connects the same
vertices, or vice versa. If we want to specify the direction of the transfor-
mation, then we will call it a ∆-to-Y transformation, respectively a Y -to-∆
transformation.
e
f
g
e
f
g
We refer to the ﬁgure for the “natural” correspondence between the edges
of the triangle and the edges of the 3-star. Note that these operations,
replacing a K3 by a K1,3, preserve the number of edges in the graph.

4.2 Simple ∆Y Transformations Preserve Realizability
107
However, a ∆Y transformation might create series or parallel edges, which
can then be SP-reduced.
We note here a simple lemma, characterizing when connectivity is pre-
served under Y -to-∆operations.
Lemma 4.2.
(i) Let G be a 2-connected graph, and let {e, f, g} be the edges at a
vertex v of degree 3 in G.
If none of its edges are parallel (i.e., if v has three diﬀerent neighbors),
then the result of a Y -to-∆operation is again 2-connected.
(ii) Let G be a 3-connected graph (in particular, there are no parallel
edges; all vertex degrees are at least 3) that is not K4. Let {e, f, g}
be the edges at a vertex v in G of degree 3.
If we perform a Y -to-∆operation on this 3-star, and then delete all
parallel edges created by this (i.e., all edges that originally connected
neighbors of v), then the resulting graph is again 3-connected.
Proof. This follows directly from the deﬁnitions: for this consider a Y -to-∆
operation G −→G′. Then for any set of one or two separating vertices
in G′, the same set is separating in G as well. The only problem is that a
Y -to-∆operation can create parallel edges; if we delete them, the operation
preserves 3-connectedness.
The nice thing now is that, because of duality, we immediately get a dual
statement, Lemma 4.2∗, about connectivity after a ∆-to-Y transformation.
For this we use that under duality, we have
embedded planar graph G
←→
dual graph G∗,
contracting series edges
←→
deleting parallel edges,
k-connected
←→
k-connected,
nonseparating triangle
←→
3-star,
∆-to-Y transformation
←→
Y -to-∆transformation.
This duality can be carried into our reduction for polytopes, because the
graph of a 3-polytope is exactly the dual graph of the polar polytope:
G(P)∗= G(P ∆).
4.2
Simple ∆Y Transformations Preserve
Realizability
By a simple ∆Y reduction we mean any ∆Y operation followed immediately
by all the SP reductions that are then possible. By Lemma 4.2 and its dual,
