[문서 맥락]
책: Lectures on Polytopes / 저자: Günter M. Ziegler
챕터: 4. Steinitz' Theorem for 3-Polytopes
현재 소단원: 4.3 Planar Graphs are ΔY Reducible
직전 소단원: 「4.2 Simple ΔY Transformations Preserve Realizability」
[본문]
4.3 Planar Graphs are ∆Y Reducible
109
Proof. By duality, respectively polarity, we have to treat only the four
types of ∆-to-Y transformations. For these, the transformation from P ′
to P just corresponds to “cutting oﬀa vertex” by some suitable plane.
(To visualize this, consider our sketch of the four types of simple ∆-to-Y
transformations, interpreting them as pictures of 3-polytopes.)
4.3
Planar Graphs are ∆Y Reducible
In this section we show that every 3-connected planar graph (with n ≥4
edges) can be reduced to K4 by a sequence of simple ∆Y transformations.
This is a special case of a much more powerful theorem (for 2-connected pla-
nar graphs plus a “return edge”) that was ﬁrst established by Epifanov [198]
and has a clever and simple proof by Truemper [546]. In this section, we
follow his expositions in [546] and [547, Sect. 4.3].
For a while, we will only require that the graphs considered are 2-
connected; in particular, we admit ∆Y operations if they keep our graphs
2-connected.
In the simplicity of Truemper’s approach to Epifanov’s theorem, the
reader should appreciate the “power of a normal form theorem” (in this
case: the embedding of a planar graph as a minor of a grid graph, which is
also at the heart of Robertson & Seymour’s work [464] on graph minors).
Here come three lemmas and a corollary, which together prove every-
thing. [Working through this, you can practice “three levels of reading”:
ﬁrst read only the lemmas, and try to understand what they mean and
how much is trivial. Second glance over the proofs, and try to see whether
you know how to do them yourself. If you know, just do it. If you don’t,
try to ﬁnd counterexamples. In the third step, work your way through the
proofs until you are conﬁdent that you found all the errors I made and the
shortcuts I missed. Tell me about them.]

110
4. Steinitz’ Theorem for 3-Polytopes
For the following, we will call a 2-connected graph G ∆Y -reducible if it
can be transformed into the graph C2 with two parallel edges by a sequence
of ∆Y transformations and SP reductions.
Lemma 4.4.
If a planar graph G is ∆Y -reducible, then so is every
2-connected minor H of G.
Proof. We use an induction on the number of reduction steps that are
necessary to reduce G. We can assume that H has no series or parallel
edges, otherwise we can make the corresponding reductions. Now if the
reduction for G starts with a series-parallel reduction step, then H is a
minor of the reduced graph as well, because it does not contain both of the
series or parallel edges.
Therefore, we can assume that the reduction of G starts with a ∆Y
reduction step. Exploiting duality, we may assume that this is a ∆-to-Y
step G −→G′.
G :
G′ :
e
f
g
e
f
g
Let e, f, g be the three edges of G that are involved. One possibility is that
all three edges are contained in H: then they form a nonseparating triangle
in H as well, and we can perform the corresponding ∆-to-Y step H −→H′.
Then by induction we get that H′ is ∆Y -reducible, and hence so is H.
In the other case, some of the three edges e, f, g do not appear in H.
What happened to them? Since H is simple, it is not possible that only
one or two of them were contracted. If all three were contracted, then we
can assume that ﬁrst one edge was deleted, then the others were contracted.
Using that deletions and contractions commute, and possibly relabeling, we
can thus assume that the ﬁrst edge that disappears when H is formed from
G, say e, is deleted.
But then we get the same minor H from G′, by contracting the corre-
sponding edge from G′, because the deletion of e from G and the contraction
of e in G′ result in the same graph. Again we are ﬁnished by induction.
Denote the grid graph with mn vertices and m(n−1) + n(m−1) edges by
G(m, n). Clearly the grid graphs G(m, n) and G(n, m) are isomorphic.

4.3 Planar Graphs are ∆Y Reducible
111
Our sketch shows the grid graph G(5, 6).
Lemma 4.5.
If G is planar, then it is a minor of a grid graph.
Proof. For this, ﬁx an embedding of G into the plane R2; now split the
vertices of G in order to get a graph G′ of which G is a minor, such that
all vertices of G have degree at most 3.
Then we can construct an embedding of G′ (with subdivided edges) into
a ﬁnite grid that is combinatorially equivalent to the given embedding (in
the sense that the vertices at a given edge come in the same cyclic order).
For that we draw one edge at a time on the grid. Whenever our grid is too
coarse, we can reﬁne it by taking half the grid size.
1
2
3
4
5
7
8
6
9
10
11
3
4
5
6
9
2
1
7
10
8
11
Once a subdivision graph G′ is represented as a subgraph of the grid graph
this way, it is clear that G is a minor of the grid graph.
This is quite trivial. Much more sophisticated versions of this, restricting
the size of the grid we embed into, are interesting and important for applica-
tions in VLSI-layout problems. We refer to Lawler et al. [350, Sect. 3.4.5],
Lengauer [359, Ch. 5], and Kant [311] for further information as well as
more precise and sophisticated versions of such “grid layout” and “graph
drawing” results.

112
4. Steinitz’ Theorem for 3-Polytopes
Lemma 4.6.
All grid graphs G(m, n) with m, n ≥3 are ∆Y -reducible
to K4.
Proof. We use two basic observations. First, if an edge connects two neigh-
bors of a vertex of degree 3, then we can delete it, by performing ﬁrst a
∆-to-Y transformation and then a series reduction.
Second, if an edge connects two neighbors of a vertex of degree 4, then we
can move the edge over to “the other side,” using ﬁrst a ∆-to-Y transfor-
mation and then a Y -to-∆transformation.
Using these two observations, we can reduce any grid graph G(m, n) to K4,
as follows.
First perform a series reduction in the upper-right corner. Then, assum-
ing that m ≥4, we take the two edges in the lower-left corner and perform
a series reduction to get a single edge. We can move this single edge across
the whole grid in a sequence of degree-4 moves until we “hit the boundary.”
There either the edge is parallel to the diagonal corner edge and we can
parallel-delete, or it can be deleted according to our degree-3 move.

4.4 Extensions of Steinitz’ Theorem
113
This way we have deleted the ﬁrst square in the last row; similarly, we can
delete the second square in this row, and so on; the last square is deleted
by two series reductions and one parallel reduction.
We can delete all the squares in the ﬁrst column of our board symmetrically,
if n ≥4.
At the end, this leaves us with the grid G(3, 3) with one short corner, which
is easily reduced ﬁrst to the “wheel” graph W4 of a square pyramid, and
then to K4.
Corollary 4.7.
Every 3-connected planar graph G can be reduced to K4
by a sequence of simple ∆Y transformations.
Proof. The three lemmas together show that G is ∆Y -reducible. We follow
this reduction to the ﬁrst point where parallel or series edges are created.
These can be reduced immediately, which also results in a 3-connected
planar graph G by Lemma 4.2. The graph we now have has fewer edges:
hence we are done by induction on size.
Corollary 4.7 also completes our proof of Steinitz’ Theorem 4.1.
4.4
Extensions of Steinitz’ Theorem
Corollary 4.8.
For every 3-polytope, there is a rational 3-polytope that
is combinatorially equivalent.
Proof. This follows from our proof of Steinitz’ theorem: we have shown
in fact that every 3-polytope can be reduced to a simplex by two types of
operations P −→P ′:
• constructing a combinatorially polar polytope,
• “cutting oﬀ” a vertex of degree 3.
In both cases, if we have a rational realization of P ′, then we can also
construct P with rational vertices and inequalities.
