[문서 맥락]
책: Lectures on Polytopes / 저자: Günter M. Ziegler
챕터: 4. Steinitz' Theorem for 3-Polytopes
현재 소단원: 4.4 Extensions of Steinitz' Theorem
직전 소단원: 「4.3 Planar Graphs are ΔY Reducible」
[본문]
4.4 Extensions of Steinitz’ Theorem
113
This way we have deleted the ﬁrst square in the last row; similarly, we can
delete the second square in this row, and so on; the last square is deleted
by two series reductions and one parallel reduction.
We can delete all the squares in the ﬁrst column of our board symmetrically,
if n ≥4.
At the end, this leaves us with the grid G(3, 3) with one short corner, which
is easily reduced ﬁrst to the “wheel” graph W4 of a square pyramid, and
then to K4.
Corollary 4.7.
Every 3-connected planar graph G can be reduced to K4
by a sequence of simple ∆Y transformations.
Proof. The three lemmas together show that G is ∆Y -reducible. We follow
this reduction to the ﬁrst point where parallel or series edges are created.
These can be reduced immediately, which also results in a 3-connected
planar graph G by Lemma 4.2. The graph we now have has fewer edges:
hence we are done by induction on size.
Corollary 4.7 also completes our proof of Steinitz’ Theorem 4.1.
4.4
Extensions of Steinitz’ Theorem
Corollary 4.8.
For every 3-polytope, there is a rational 3-polytope that
is combinatorially equivalent.
Proof. This follows from our proof of Steinitz’ theorem: we have shown
in fact that every 3-polytope can be reduced to a simplex by two types of
operations P −→P ′:
• constructing a combinatorially polar polytope,
• “cutting oﬀ” a vertex of degree 3.
In both cases, if we have a rational realization of P ′, then we can also
construct P with rational vertices and inequalities.

114
4. Steinitz’ Theorem for 3-Polytopes
Corollary 4.9.
Every 3-connected planar graph has a representation in
the plane such that all edges are straight, and all the bounded regions
determined by it, as well as the union of all the bounded regions, are convex
polygons.
Proof. This we get by representing G as the graph of a 3-polytope, and
then choosing a point x beyond one of the facets. “Viewing” the polytope
from this perspective (and projecting it to the facet along the “rays of
vision”) gives us the required representation.
This proof contains the construction of a “Schlegel diagram” for the
3-polytope: see the next lecture. There are various results in graph the-
ory related to this. There are other proofs, like the one by Tutte [549],
which use less geometry and more graph theory. A reduction method by
Thomassen [540] leads to a very short proof [268, Anhang 1]. See also Ex-
ercise 4.7.
There are various other strengthenings of Steinitz’ theorem, which say
that we can prescribe a lot about the polytope to be constructed. For
example, one can prescribe the shape of a facet of P in advance, by Barnette
& Gr¨unbaum [52]. That is, given a 3-polytope P with a k-gon facet K, and
given any k-gon K′ ⊆R3, we can “redraw” P so that we get a polytope P ′ ⊆
R3 which is combinatorially equivalent to P, and such that K′ is the facet
of P ′ which corresponds to K ⊆P.
Similarly, we can prescribe the shadow boundary, by Barnette [41]: for
every cycle in G(P) we can ﬁnd a realization of P and a projection of P
to the plane that carries the cycle to the boundary of the image polygon.
This is quite amazing: just try to verify this on your favorite 3-polytope; see
Exercise 4.9. However, one shouldn’t get too greedy at this point: the shape
of the image polygon cannot be prescribed for this — see Exercise 4.12.
Also, for every symmetric graph there is a polytope that realizes the full
symmetry group of the graph, see Mani [375] – and Theorem 4.13 below.
The following is perhaps the more important extension, and is what
properly should be taken as a part of the Steinitz theorem. It says that
the space of all ways to ﬁnd coordinates for a 3-polytope is connected
(modulo reﬂections). For the stronger statement below, we have to consider
all coordinatizations “modulo rotations and reﬂections.” For this, we need
a few deﬁnitions.
Deﬁnition 4.10.
Let P be a d-polytope on n > d vertices. We can
label the vertices vert(P) = {x1, x2, . . . , xn} such that {x1, x2, . . . , xd+1}

Notes
115
determines a ﬂag, that is, aﬀ({x1, . . . , xk}) ∩P is a (k−1)-face of P, for
1 ≤k ≤d+1.
The realization space
R(P) ⊆Rd×n
of P is the set of all matrices Y ∈Rd×n such that yk = xk for 1 ≤k ≤d+1,
and such that P is combinatorially equivalent to Q := conv{y1, . . . , yn}
under the correspondence xi −→yi.
It is easy to see that the realization space is an elementary semialge-
braic set deﬁned over Z, that is, a subset of a real vector space that can
be deﬁned in terms of polynomial equations and strict inequalities with
integer coeﬃcients. Such semialgebraic sets can be arbitrarily complicated
as topological spaces, in general (see Exercise 4.22). The following assumes
that you know what contractible means for a topological space: if not, just
accept that it says that the space has “no holes”; in particular, contractible
spaces are connected.
Theorem 4.11 (Steinitz’ theorem).
[527, 524]
For every 3-polytope P, the realization space R(P) is contractible, and
thus connected.
All of these theorems — on prescribed facets, shadow boundary, sym-
metry, realization space, and so on — were proved with basically the same
technique, and some clever variations. Like Steinitz’ original theorem, they
are far from trivial. One way to see this is that they all fail “one dimension
up,” for d = 4. We will construct explicit examples in the next two lectures.
Notes
The reason for this version of the deﬁnitions for graph connectivity is that
they ﬁt into a larger and very natural pattern. Namely, following Tutte [550,
551] (see Truemper [547, p. 15]) one deﬁnes a k-separation (for k ≥1) of
a graph G = (V, E) as a partition into two graphs, G1 = (V1, E1) and
G2 = (V2, E2), which have exactly k vertices but no edges in common, and
which have at least k edges each. Thus, our sketch
shows a 4-separation, if each side has at least 4 edges (and thus at least
one cycle, or a nonseparating vertex, or both). For any k ≥2, a connected
graph is k-connected if it has no l-separation for 1 ≤l < k.
