[문서 맥락]
책: Lectures on Polytopes / 저자: Günter M. Ziegler
챕터: 5. Schlegel Diagrams for 4-Polytopes
현재 소단원: 5.2 Schlegel Diagrams
직전 소단원: 「5.1 Polyhedral Complexes」
[본문]
132
5. Schlegel Diagrams for 4-Polytopes
A canonical choice for f is the function f(x) = x2
1 + . . . + x2
d = ||x||2. Our
sketch tries to illustrate the construction of the 3-polytope eP3(6, 4).
To end this section, we give the following ﬁgure as a small example of a
subdivision that is not regular. To see this, note that we can assume that
f(v4) = f(v5) = f(v6) = 0 for the three interior vertices (by subtracting a
linear function from f), and then we get a cycle f(v1) > f(v2) > f(v3) >
f(v1) of conditions for the three outer vertices.
 1
2
3
4
6
 5
Note that the subdivision ΣP (Q) encodes a lot of information about P,
but essentially we “see only half of P” in ΣP (Q). Now, we’ll “take a closer
look” — in order to “see more.”
5.2
Schlegel Diagrams
For a “close look” at polytopes, we choose a point of view yF beyond facet F
(see Section 3.1 for the deﬁnition of “beyond”) and use the facet F as a
“projection screen” for everything we “see” behind it.
Deﬁnition 5.5.
Let P be a d-polytope in Rd, and let F ∈L(P) be a
facet of P, deﬁned by the valid inequality ax ≤z. We denote by
H := aﬀ(F) = {x ∈Rd : ax = z}

5.2 Schlegel Diagrams
133
the hyperplane spanned by F. Choose a point yF beyond F. For x ∈P,
we deﬁne
p(x) := yF + z −ayF
ax −ayF
(x −yF ).
x
p(x)
H
yF
The Schlegel diagram of P based at the facet F, denoted as D(P, F), is the
image under p of all proper faces of P other than F; that is, it is the set
system
D(P, F)
:=
n
p(G) : G ∈L(P)\{P, F}
o
,
contained in the hyperplane H.
The map p is nonlinear, and in general we cannot replace “combinato-
rially equivalent” with “aﬃnely isomorphic” in the following proposition;
see Exercise 5.8. Now comes the reason why this construction makes sense.
Proposition 5.6.
The Schlegel diagram of P based at the facet F is a
polytopal subdivision of F that is combinatorially equivalent to the complex
C((∂P)\{F}) of all proper faces of P other than F.
Proof. We use the notation of Deﬁnition 5.5. For every face G of P, the
set
CG := {yF + λ(x −yF ) : x ∈G, λ ≥0}
is a cone with vertex yF : in fact, ayF > ax for all x ∈P by construction
of yF .
H
yF
CG
G
If G is a proper face of P, then it is contained in a hyperplane
Hi = {x ∈Rd : aix = bi}
that does not contain yF . Thus we ﬁnd that the face lattice of CG is iso-
morphic to L(G). Now if we intersect CG with a hyperplane such as H,
which has a bounded, nonempty intersection with CG, then we have that

134
5. Schlegel Diagrams for 4-Polytopes
the face lattice of the intersection is isomorphic to that of CG. Here we
have p(G) = CG ∩H (the formula for p(x) is derived from this condition),
and thus L(G) = L(CG) = L(p(G)).
(Actually, the map p : G −→p(G) is a projective transformation, very
much like the version we have in Section 2.6: see Exercise 5.8.)
Let us note here one very important property of Schlegel diagrams: that
G ∩∂F is a face of F = |D|, for all G ∈D.
Schlegel diagrams are, sure enough, named after a mathematician, Victor
Schlegel [474]. It seems that Sommerville coined the name with his 1929
book [506]. In the next section we will get a more general deﬁnition of a
d-diagram and then use “Schlegel” as an adjective for a d-diagram that is
a Schlegel diagram.
If a Schlegel diagram of P is given as a polytopal complex D, then we can
reconstruct the corresponding facet F of P as F = |D|. So with Proposi-
tion 5.6 we see that every Schlegel diagram D determines the combinatorial
isomorphism type of P: we can reconstruct the face lattice of P from it.
For this we recover F = |D|, and get
L(P)
∼=
(D ∪{F, ˆ1}, ≤),
where the partial order “≤” is by inclusion on D, we have G ≤F if and
only if G ∈D is a face of F, and ˆ1 is an artiﬁcial maximal element.
The interesting property of the Schlegel diagram is that it completely
encodes the combinatorial structure of a d-dimensional polytope into a
(d −1)-dimensional object; after all, D(P, F) is a polytopal complex con-
tained in the (d −1)-dimensional hyperplane H = aﬀ(F).
This reduction in dimension makes Schlegel diagrams especially useful
in the case d = 4, where the Schlegel diagram of a 4-dimensional polytope
is a 3-dimensional polytopal complex, for which we have a ﬁghting chance
for a geometric visualization.
To illustrate how Schlegel’s construction works, we start, however, at
d = 3. The following drawings show the construction of the Schlegel dia-
gram, and the (2-dimensional) Schlegel diagram itself, for a 3-dimensional
simplex
where the center vertex in the diagram represents the (unique) vertex of
the tetrahedron which is not on the facet we project to. Similarly, here are

5.2 Schlegel Diagrams
135
the drawings for the 3-dimensional cube.
Next we consider the 3-dimensional prism (the product of a triangle with
a 1-polytope): this has nonisomorphic facets, and thus we get diﬀerent
Schlegel diagrams for points of view beyond diﬀerent facets (a square facet
and a triangle facet).
And ﬁnally, here is an attempt to illustrate how you construct the Schlegel
diagram of a lifted pile of boxes, based on the big square facet on its top.
The drawing is not metrically correct in any sense — just an attempt
to understand the geometric situation. Speciﬁcally, we go for the Schlegel

136
5. Schlegel Diagrams for 4-Polytopes
diagram of eP3(6, 4), from a point of view “above the polytope”:
Now we go for the 3-dimensional Schlegel diagrams for 4-dimensional
polytopes: these are all the “pictures” of 4-polytopes you will get! For
example, here is (a 2-dimensional drawing of) the (3-dimensional) Schlegel
diagram of the 4-dimensional simplex,
where the center vertex in the diagram represents the (unique) vertex of
the 4-simplex which is not on the tetrahedron we project to; here is the
drawing for the 4-cube,

5.2 Schlegel Diagrams
137
and here’s the Schlegel diagram for a product of two simplices P = ∆2×∆2,
a decomposition of a triangular prism into ﬁve triangular prisms — compare
this to our description in Example 0.5.
We close with an attempted sketch of the Schlegel diagram of a 4-dimen-
sional lifted pile of boxes, namely eP4(2, 2, 2).
Although this sketch is quite sketchy, the picture might try to tell you about
the combinatorial structure of (the Schlegel diagram of) the 4-polytopes
eP4(z1, z2, z3). In fact, from the Schlegel diagram (compare also to the 3-
dimensional case) we see that eP4(z1, z2, z3) has exactly z1z2z3 + 7 facets.
The seven “big ones” are the big cubical facet on which the diagram is
based and the six 3-dimensional facets that are lifted piles of cubes: two
copies of eP2(z1, z2) at the bottom and the top of the diagram, two copies
of eP2(z1, z3) at the front and the back of the diagram, and two copies
of eP2(z2, z3) at the left and right sides of the Schlegel diagram. Between
these six big facets, we have the subcomplex formed by z1z2z3 little cubes,
which is isomorphic to the pile P3(z1, z2, z3) from which we started the
construction.
Make sure that you “see” this: it will be useful later (in Section 8.2)
when we study the lifted piles of cubes again. More interesting structure
connected with the “piles of cubes” polytopes constructed and studied here
has recently been uncovered by Athanasiadis [25].

138
5. Schlegel Diagrams for 4-Polytopes
5.3
d-Diagrams
Schlegel diagrams were studied extensively around the turn of this century;
however, no one realized that there is a problem: not everything that “looks
like” a Schlegel diagram actually is one. (See the notes below.) Now we
deﬁne looks like.
Deﬁnition 5.7.
A d-diagram is a polytopal subdivision D of a d-polytope,
P = |D| ⊆Rd, such that G ∩∂P is a face of P for each G ∈D.
A d-diagram D is simplicial if |D| and all the polytopes in D are sim-
plices. The diagram is simple if every vertex of |D| is contained in exactly
d diﬀerent d-polytopes of D, and every other vertex of D is contained in
exactly d + 1 diﬀerent d-polytopes in D.
Check that every Schlegel diagram of a d-polytope is a (d −1)-diagram!
We deﬁne the face poset L(D), and combinatorial equivalence, of d-diagrams
as a special case of the deﬁnitions for polyhedral complexes. With this, a
Schlegel (d −1)-diagram D(P, F) is simplicial, respectively simple (accord-
ing to Deﬁnition 5.7), if and only if the polytope P is simplicial, respectively
simple. In fact, a diagram D is simplicial if and only if its face lattice bL(D)
“looks like” the face lattice of a simplicial polytope, in that all the lower
intervals [∅, G] are boolean for G̸ = ˆ1; similarly, D is simple if and only if
all upper intervals [G, ˆ1] are boolean for G̸ = ∅.
Here are a few trivial examples: a Schlegel diagram (of a triangular
prism), a 2-diagram that is not a Schlegel diagram, and a polytopal subdi-
vision that is not a 2-diagram.
We note that the question of whether a given d-diagram is a Schlegel
diagram can be reduced to a linear programming problem (Exercise 5.2)
— but the question of whether it is combinatorially equivalent to a Schlegel
diagram is much harder; the task can be split into the enumeration problem
for oriented matroid spheres, and the oriented matroid realizability problem
(see the notes at the end of this lecture). So, the following is a decidedly
nontrivial theorem, accompanied by a trivial proof.
Theorem 5.8.
Every 2-diagram is combinatorially equivalent to a Schlegel diagram.
