[문서 맥락]
책: Lectures on Polytopes / 저자: Günter M. Ziegler
챕터: 5. Schlegel Diagrams for 4-Polytopes
현재 소단원: 5.3 d-Diagrams
직전 소단원: 「5.2 Schlegel Diagrams」
[본문]
138
5. Schlegel Diagrams for 4-Polytopes
5.3
d-Diagrams
Schlegel diagrams were studied extensively around the turn of this century;
however, no one realized that there is a problem: not everything that “looks
like” a Schlegel diagram actually is one. (See the notes below.) Now we
deﬁne looks like.
Deﬁnition 5.7.
A d-diagram is a polytopal subdivision D of a d-polytope,
P = |D| ⊆Rd, such that G ∩∂P is a face of P for each G ∈D.
A d-diagram D is simplicial if |D| and all the polytopes in D are sim-
plices. The diagram is simple if every vertex of |D| is contained in exactly
d diﬀerent d-polytopes of D, and every other vertex of D is contained in
exactly d + 1 diﬀerent d-polytopes in D.
Check that every Schlegel diagram of a d-polytope is a (d −1)-diagram!
We deﬁne the face poset L(D), and combinatorial equivalence, of d-diagrams
as a special case of the deﬁnitions for polyhedral complexes. With this, a
Schlegel (d −1)-diagram D(P, F) is simplicial, respectively simple (accord-
ing to Deﬁnition 5.7), if and only if the polytope P is simplicial, respectively
simple. In fact, a diagram D is simplicial if and only if its face lattice bL(D)
“looks like” the face lattice of a simplicial polytope, in that all the lower
intervals [∅, G] are boolean for G̸ = ˆ1; similarly, D is simple if and only if
all upper intervals [G, ˆ1] are boolean for G̸ = ∅.
Here are a few trivial examples: a Schlegel diagram (of a triangular
prism), a 2-diagram that is not a Schlegel diagram, and a polytopal subdi-
vision that is not a 2-diagram.
We note that the question of whether a given d-diagram is a Schlegel
diagram can be reduced to a linear programming problem (Exercise 5.2)
— but the question of whether it is combinatorially equivalent to a Schlegel
diagram is much harder; the task can be split into the enumeration problem
for oriented matroid spheres, and the oriented matroid realizability problem
(see the notes at the end of this lecture). So, the following is a decidedly
nontrivial theorem, accompanied by a trivial proof.
Theorem 5.8.
Every 2-diagram is combinatorially equivalent to a Schlegel diagram.

5.4 Three Examples
139
Proof. A simple combinatorial argument implies that the graph of every
2-diagram is 3-connected (it is simple and planar by construction). Thus the
theorem follows from Steinitz’ Theorem 4.1, together with the construction
of Schlegel diagrams of 3-polytopes.
Proposition 5.9.
If a diagram D is Schlegel, then D is a regular subdi-
vision of F = |D|. The converse is true in the case where F is a simplex,
but not in general.
We omit the proof — see Exercises 5.2(ii) and 5.7.
There are other properties that separate Schlegel diagrams from some
non-Schlegel diagrams. For example, let D be a d-diagram, and let L be
the “reconstructed” face lattice of the (d + 1)-polytope P, if it exists. The
combinatorial information about D is then contained in the pair (L, F),
where F is a distinguished coatom of L. Now we call a diagram invertible
if for every coatom F ′ of L, there is a d-diagram corresponding to the pair
(L, F ′). We know that every Schlegel diagram is invertible. It turns out
that a part of the non-Schlegel diagrams is not invertible.
Similarly, we say that D has a combinatorial polar if there is a diagram
whose combinatorial data are given by the pair (Lop, A), where A is a vertex
of D (corresponding to an atom of L, and thus to a coatom of Lop). Again,
every Schlegel diagram has a polar diagram (which is Schlegel), and some
non-Schlegel diagrams have polars, some do not.
5.4
Three Examples
Examples of interesting Schlegel diagrams, and of 3-diagrams that are not
Schlegel diagrams, are not too hard to come by. In the following we will de-
scribe three strikingly simple examples, where two are due to Barnette [47],
and one is from Schulz [487]. See also Ewald [201, Sect. IV.4] for the “clas-
sical” examples of Br¨uckner and Barnette (see the notes), and Schulz [488]
for some other interesting constructions.
From general theory (namely the technique of “Gale diagrams,” which
we will soon get to) one can see that every d-diagram with at most d + 4
vertices is always Schlegel. Therefore, the minimal counterexamples that
we can hope for are 3-diagrams with 8 vertices.
Here we go: the following construction produces a 3-diagram that is not
combinatorially equivalent to the Schlegel diagram of any 4-polytope.
Example 5.10 (Schulz’ 3-diagram).
[487]
We start with a 3-polytope Q with 6 vertices, labeled 1, 2, . . . , 6 in our
drawing. The 3-polytope can be realized by starting with a tetrahedron,
cutting oﬀthe top to get a triangular prism, and then cutting oﬀan extra
triangle [2, 3, 5] as in the ﬁgure, where 3, 5 were vertices of the truncated
prism, and 2 was on an edge of it.
