[문서 맥락]
책: Lectures on Polytopes / 저자: Günter M. Ziegler
챕터: 6. Duality, Gale Diagrams, and Applications
현재 소단원: 6.5.a A Nonrational 8-Polytope
직전 소단원: 「6.5 Polytopes with Few Vertices」
[본문]
172
6. Duality, Gale Diagrams, and Applications
For polytopes with d + 3 vertices, the complete classiﬁcation becomes
diﬃcult, but not out of reach. Their aﬃne Gale diagrams are conﬁgurations
of signed points on a line. The main problem is to decide which diﬀerent
diagrams represent combinatorially equivalent polytopes. First results were
due to Gale, while Perles developed the (Gale diagram) techniques neces-
sary to analyze polytopes with d+3 vertices. The special case of simplicial
polytopes was done in Gr¨unbaum [252, Sect. 6.2]; the work was completed
by Mani [376] and Kleinschmidt [333]. Explicit formulas for the number of
d-polytopes with d + 3 vertices were obtained by Perles [252] for the sim-
plicial case and by Fusy [217] for the general case (correcting an error in an
earlier solution by Lloyd [370]). Note that the octahedra that we considered
before have d + 3 vertices, for d = 3.
The polytopes with d+3 vertices still do not have any unusual properties.
Finally, we arrive at the case of polytopes with d + 4 vertices: here is
the threshold for counterexamples, as Sturmfels [532] calls it. They can be
analyzed in terms of planar point conﬁgurations — which can be arbitrarily
complicated. In particular, for high enough d there are
• d-polytopes with d + 4 vertices that do not have a realization with
rational coordinates,
• d-polytopes with d + 4 vertices for which the shape of a facet cannot
be prescribed, and
• d-polytopes with d + 4 vertices that have disconnected realization
spaces.
We will now describe Gale diagram approaches to these three phenomena.
(a) A Nonrational 8-Polytope
Using Gale diagrams, Perles has shown that there are nonrational poly-
topes, that is, polytopes for which there are no combinatorially equivalent
polytopes with rational coordinates.
Example 6.21 (Perles).
[252, p. 95] [96, Fig. 8.4.1]
There is a nonrational 8-polytope with 12 vertices.,
To see this, one veriﬁes that the conﬁguration G in the ﬁgure on the next
page has three properties:
1. G cannot be realized with rational coordinates “as a matroid”: there
is no rational planar conﬁguration of 12 points such that the same sets
of points as in G coincide, respectively are collinear. (Essentially, there
is a golden ratio involved in the construction of a regular pentagon,
so it can only be realized with coordinates in a ﬁeld containing
√
5.)

6.5 Polytopes with Few Vertices
173
2. G is the Gale diagram of an 8-dimensional polytope with 12 vertices
(check this!); a polytope represented by G cannot have all coordinates
rational.
1
5
3
4
2
12
7
10
6  9
8
11
3. Consider any spanning conﬁguration G′ of 12 signed points in the
plane (an aﬃne Gale diagram in R2). If G′ has the the same positive
circuits as G, then the three pairs of points that coincide in G have
to coincide in G′ as well, and the triples and quadruples that are
collinear in G have to be collinear in G′ as well, because they are all
positive vectors (unions of positive circuits).
Thus also G′ cannot be realized with rational coordinates.
Thus G is the Gale diagram of a nonrational polytope P. If P ′ is a polytope
that is combinatorially equivalent to P, then its Gale diagram G′ has the
same positive circuits as the Gale diagram G, hence with part 3. above G′
and P ′ cannot be rational either.
(b) Facets of 4-Polytopes Cannot be Prescribed
Perles apparently ﬁrst observed that the shape of a facet of a d-polytope
cannot in general prescribed; see Gr¨unbaum [252, p. 96, Ex. 3]. Klein-
schmidt [332] ﬁnally constructed a 4-polytope with 8 vertices for which the
shape of a facet cannot be prescribed — this is the smallest dimension and
the minimal number of vertices for such an example, because all facets can
be prescribed for 3-polytopes, and for all d-polytope with at most d+3 ver-
tices. With d = 4 and n = 8, Kleinschmidt’s polytope can be constructed
