[문서 맥락]
책: Lectures on Polytopes / 저자: Günter M. Ziegler
챕터: 6. Duality, Gale Diagrams, and Applications
현재 소단원: 6.ex Problems and Exercises
직전 소단원: 「6.6 Rigidity and Universality」
[연습문제]
184
6. Duality, Gale Diagrams, and Applications
For issues related to the isotopy conjecture, we refer to [96, Sect. 8.6].
The Lawrence construction is due to Jim Lawrence (surprise), but he
never published it. It appears in Billera & Munson [77, Sect. 2] and is also
explained in detail (in oriented matroid terms) in [96, Sect. 9.3].
A “σ-construction” to produce rigid 6-polytopes from planar conﬁgura-
tions was given by Sturmfels in [530]. However, we found the arguments
in [530] to be incorrect. (Speciﬁcally, the claim that the orientation of all
the “outer simplices” of a polytope is determined by the combinatorics of
the face lattice is only true for simplicial polytopes: for this, consider the
cone over a nonrigid polytope, where all simplices are outer; however, the
polytopes produced by the σ-construction are not simplicial, and they turn
out not to be rigid in general.)
Problems and Exercises
6.0
Prove Radon’s theorem: given any set V of d + 2 points in Rd, we
can ﬁnd disjoint nonempty subsets V1, V2 ⊆V such that relint(V1) ∩
relint(V2)̸ = ∅. Why can we assume that conv(Vi) are simplices?
6.1
Show that if two conﬁgurations of n points in Rd have the same set
of minimal aﬃne dependences, then they are aﬃnely isomorphic.
6.2
List all the circuits and cocircuits for the hexagon discussed in Sec-
tion 6.1. How many vectors and covectors are there? (Don’t list them
all, there are many.)
6.3
Show that the deﬁnitions of vectors, circuits, and so on, for the aﬃne
and linear cases are consistent: if V =

1l
X

, then
a-Dep(X) = Dep(V )
and
a-Val(X) = Val(V ),
and thus we get the same oriented matroid (the same circuits, cocir-
cuits, etc.) for X and for V .
6.4
Let D = (V, A) be a directed graph with arc set A = {1, 2, . . . , n}.
Deﬁne the signed circuits of D to be the sign vectors u ∈{0, +, −}n
that correspond to circuits in D together with a chosen orientation,
as follows: if the arc i is not contained in the circuit, then ui = 0;
if it is in the circuit and directed according to the orientation, then
ui = +; and if it is directed opposite to the orientation, then ui = −.

Problems and Exercises
185
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
u =










0
0
0
+
−
−
−
+
0










For example, for the digraph drawn here and the oriented circuit
marked in it we read oﬀthe signed circuit u next to the drawing.
Show that the signed circuits we get that way are from a realizable
oriented matroid (as in Deﬁnition 6.5), whose cocircuits correspond
to the minimal directed cuts in the graph. Interpret the vectors and
the covectors of this oriented matroid in terms of the graph.
(Hint: Associate a vector conﬁguration with D. A canonical choice is
vij = ei −ej for an arc from the node j to the node i.)
6.5
Prove that our two characterizations of acyclic vector conﬁgurations
are equivalent. Prove that the dual of an acyclic conﬁguration is to-
tally cyclic (Corollary 6.16).
Describe a small vector conﬁguration that is neither acyclic nor to-
tally cyclic.
6.6
A d-polytope with n vertices is simplicial if and only if every non-
empty coface has at least n −d elements. Derive from this a char-
acterization of the (aﬃne) Gale diagrams that represent simplicial
polytopes.
6.7
Given a Gale diagram, how can one (computationally) enumerate the
facets of the corresponding polytope?
6.8
Show that the following diagrams represent the four diﬀerent combi-
natorial types of 4-polytopes with 6 vertices.
Describe the polytopes.
How many facets, and how many edges do they have? Which poly-
topes are simple or simplicial? Which is bipyr(∆3)? Which is C4(6)?
6.9
Describe all the 4-polytopes with 7 vertices. For this, use all the
“visualization tools” that we have developed so far:
• Schlegel diagrams
• Gale diagrams
• combinatorial descriptions (vertex-facet matrix)
and show how the various types of data correspond to each other.

186
6. Duality, Gale Diagrams, and Applications
6.10* What is the smallest number of vertices for a nonrational 4-polytopes?
(Non-rational 4-polytopes exist by Richter-Gebert’s universality the-
orem, see the Notes for this chapter. The smallest (explicit) example
by Richter-Gebert has 33 vertices and ?? facets [459, p. 80]. The
minimal number of vertices and facets is not known.)
6.11
Analyze the 4-dimensional polytope X∗with 8 facets and 12 vertices
whose polar is given by the aﬃne Gale diagram
Show that X∗has a hexagon 2-face whose shape cannot be prescribed.
Verify that X∗is combinatorially equivalent to the polytope whose
Schlegel diagram is given by Exercise 5.11.
6.12
Draw an arbitrary “nice” conﬁguration of black and white points into
the plane, and analyze:
(i) Is this the Gale diagram of a polytope? (If not, add points to
get one.)
(ii) What is its dimension and its number of facets?
(iii) Is it simple or simplicial? Can you describe its facets?
(iv) Are there vertices that are not adjacent? Can you compute the
graph?
6.13
For n ≥d ≥2, consider the moment curve in Rn−d−2, and place on
it n points, alternating between negative and positive points.
Show that the oriented matroid of this is dual to the oriented ma-
troid of the cyclic polytope Cd(n): so it is the Gale diagram of a
polytope that is combinatorially equivalent to Cd(n). Is this really a
Gale transform of Cd(n)?
6.14
Show that the following conditions are equivalent for a 2d-dimensional
polytope P with n vertices:
(i) P is neighborly.
(ii) Every set of n −d points forms is a positive covector.

Problems and Exercises
187
(iii) Every circuit of P contains exactly d + 1 positive and d + 1 neg-
ative elements.
Derive the corresponding criteria to detect whether a Gale diagram
represents an (even-dimensional) neighborly polytope.
6.15
Show that of the following two ﬁgures, the left is a Gale diagram
for C4(8), while the second is the Gale diagram of a 2-neighborly
4-polytope with 8 vertices that is not cyclic (due to [531, p. 543]).
2
8
7
6
5
4
3
1
3
2
8
7
6
5
4
1
“Many” noncyclic neighborly polytopes can be constructed this way,
by “small” modiﬁcation of the Gale diagram of a cyclic polytope.
(More were constructed by Shemer [494].)
6.16* Perles conjectured that every simplicial polytope is combinatorially
equivalent to a face ﬁgure (iterated vertex ﬁgure) of an even-dimen-
sional neighborly polytope. (Equivalently, every simple polytope is a
face of a polar of a neighborly polytope.)
(i)
Deﬁne that a (ﬁnite) conﬁguration of vectors in R3 is uniform if
any 3 of the vectors span R3. Say that it is balanced if for every
plane spanned by two vectors, the number of vectors on the two
sides are equal.
Show that for simplicial d-polytopes with d+4 vertices, the Gale
diagram construction reduces Perles’ problem to the “embedding
problem” of whether every uniform conﬁguration of d+4 vectors
in R3 can be extended to a uniform balanced conﬁguration.
(ii)
Using part (i), solve Perles’ problem for simplicial d-polytopes
with n = d + 4 vertices: every simplicial d-polytope with d +
4 vertices is a quotient (i.e., combinatorially equivalent to an
iterated vertex ﬁgure) of a neighborly (2d+4)-polytope with 2d+
8 vertices.
(Hint: For part (i) you will need the characterization of Exercise 6.14.
The Gale diagram formulation of Perles’ problem is due to Sturm-
fels. See Sturmfels [532, Sect. 7], where some partial results are also
derived. Part (ii) was done by Kortenkamp [341].)

188
6. Duality, Gale Diagrams, and Applications
6.17
Show that the ﬁgure
2
6
1
3
5
4
8
7
is an aﬃne Gale diagram of a 4-polytope P with 8 vertices, and verify
the following facts. The polytope has 9 facets, four tetrahedra, four
square pyramids, and an octahedron 235678. Every Gale diagram G′
with the same set of positive circuits has 7 and 8 on the same point:
so for every combinatorially equivalent polytope to P the vertices
2356 of the octahedron facet 235678 are coplanar. Thus the shape of
the octahedron facet cannot be prescribed. However, show that the
oriented matroid of P is not rigid.
6.18
Show that the ﬁgure below is the aﬃne Gale diagram of a 4-polytope
with 8 vertices and 11 facets, the Kleinschmidt polytope K4(8), and
verify the following facts.
Except for the facet 235678, which is an octahedron, the facets of
K4(8) are tetrahedra. The octahedron facet is not regular. No Gale
diagram G′ with the same set of positive circuits can have 136, 125,
and 178 on lines: so there is no combinatorially equivalent polytope
to K4(8) such that the octahedron facet is regular.
3
4
1
7
8
5
2
6
Show that the oriented matroid of K4(8) is not rigid.
(Kleinschmidt [332] [203], Sturmfels [532, Fig. 6(a)])
6.19
(i)
Construct a simple polytope for which the shape of a facet can-
not be prescribed. For example, you might examine the polar of

Problems and Exercises
189
the simplicial 6-polytope with 10 vertices, given by
(ii)* Can you prescribe the shape of a facet for simple 4-polytopes?
6.20
Let a centrally symmetric polytope with 2n vertices in Rd be given
as P = conv(X) for
X = {u ± v1, u ± v2, . . . , u ± vn}.
Show that the dependences and the value vectors of X can be recon-
structed from those of the following set of only n + 1 points in Rd:
X0 = {u, u + v1, u + v2, . . . , u + vn}.
Thus the combinatorics of P can be read oﬀfrom the dual conﬁgu-
ration G0 ⊆(Rn−d)∗to V0, the central (Gale) diagram of P, due to
McMullen & Shephard [402].
Use central diagrams to classify the centrally symmetric polytopes
with at most 2d + 2 vertices for small values of d. (The case d = 4
was done by Gr¨unbaum [252, Sect. 6.4].)
Argue that a complete classiﬁcation of centrally symmetric polytopes
with at most 2d + 2 vertices is out of reach.
Show that the metric properties of this diagram are important, and
that no further reduction to aﬃne diagrams is possible.
Similarly, show that the signed circuits of X0 do not determine those
of X, so we cannot simply reduce to oriented matroid data [402].
6.21
Apply the Lawrence construction to three points on a line, either all
three distinct, or two coinciding. What polytopes do you obtain? List
all circuits and cocircuits both for the original conﬁguration and for
the Lawrence lifting.
6.22
Consider the prisms over simplices, prism(∆d), and construct their
Gale diagrams. Show that they all arise as Lawrence polytopes.
6.23
Show that the oriented matroid given as an example for a 5-polytope
with a nonprescribable 2-face is not rigid. (Use the fact that one can
perturb the point 1 without changing any positive circuit.)
Is Perles’ example of a nonrational 8-polytope rigid?

190
6. Duality, Gale Diagrams, and Applications
6.24
A polytope is projectively unique if any combinatorially equivalent
polytope can be obtained by a projective transformation.
(i) Show that in the plane, triangles and quadrilaterals are projec-
tively unique, but n-gons with n ≥5 are not projectively unique.
(ii) Show that, more generally, d-polytopes with n ≤d + 2 vertices
are projectively unique.
(iii) Show that if P is projectively unique, then so is P ∆. Conclude
that d-polytopes with n ≤d + 2 facets are projectively unique.
(iv) Derive from part (iii) that 3-polytopes with f1 ≤9 edges are
projectively unique. (Use Euler’s formula v −e + f = 2 from
Exercise 4.6 or Lecture 8.)
Prove the converse, too.
(v) Show that if P is projectively unique, and F is a face of P, then
the face need not be projectively unique. In this situation, the
face F cannot be arbitrarily prescribed.
6.25
How many (positive and negative) points do you need to create the
Gale diagram of a rigid polytope from Suvorov’s conﬁguration?
6.26* What is the smallest number of points in a planar point conﬁguration
that violates the isotopy conjecture?
(At the moment the smallest known conﬁgurations have 14 points; see
Example 6.24. In contrast, isotopy is known for n ≤9 points, but only
in the case of general position conﬁgurations, by Richter [455] [96,
Sect. 8.2].
6.27
Show that the polytope P of Example 6.23 can be constructed, via
three Lawrence extensions, from the conﬁguration of Pascal’s Theo-
rem (“the vertices of a hexagon lie on an ellipse if and only if the three
intersection points of opposite sides are colinear”). This is indicated
in the following picture.
Deduce from this construction method that this is a 5-polytope for
which the shape of a 2-face cannot be prescribed.
(See Richter-Gebert [459, Example 3.4.3] for a detailed discussion.)

7
Fans, Arrangements, Zonotopes,
and Tilings
Zonotopes are the images of n-cubes under aﬃne projection maps. Since
for most aspects of polytope theory n-cubes are not very complicated, this
deﬁnition may hide the complexity and richness of this concept. Zonotopes
are interesting from various points of view. Their combinatorial structure
is closely linked to (and in a precise sense equivalent to) that of real linear
hyperplane arrangements.
The aim of this lecture is to provide basic geometric intuition and the
tools for a combinatorial description of zonotopes. We will see how zono-
topes again are modeled by oriented matroids, and discuss the surprising
appearance of general (“nonrealizable”) oriented matroids in the study of
zonotopal tilings, and of hyperplane arrangements.
7.1
Fans
Deﬁnition 7.1.
A fan in Rd is a family
F
=
{C1, C2, . . . , CN}
of nonempty polyhedral cones, with the following two properties:
(i) Every nonempty face of a cone in F is also a cone in F.
(ii) The intersection of any two cones in F is a face of both.
The fan F is complete if the union S F := C1 ∪. . . ∪CN of F is Rd, that
is, if SN
i=1 Ci = Rd. We will consider only complete fans here, and thus we
will omit the word “complete” most of the time.
 G.M. Ziegler, Lectures on Polytopes, Graduate Texts in Mathematics 152,   
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4613-8431-1_8, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2007 
 
191
