[문서 맥락]
책: Lectures on Polytopes / 저자: Günter M. Ziegler
챕터: 7. Fans, Arrangements, Zonotopes, and Tilings
현재 소단원: 7.4 Nonrealizable Oriented Matroids
직전 소단원: 「7.3 Zonotopes」
[본문]
208
7. Fans, Arrangements, Zonotopes, and Tilings
Every essential arrangement A of n hyperplanes in Rd has at least 2n
simplicial regions.
More precisely, adjacent to every hyperplane there are at least 2d
simplicial regions, and nonadjacent to any given hyperplane there
are at least 2(n −d) simplicial regions.
(Note that the simplicial regions come in pairs, since the opposite of a
simplicial cone is simplicial as well). From Shannon’s theorem, we derive
the following theorem about zonotopes.
Theorem 7.20 (Shannon’s theorem for zonotopes).
Every d-zonotope with n zones has at least 2n simple vertices.
More precisely, on every zone there are at least 2d simple vertices, and
disjoint from any given zone there are at least 2(n −d) simple vertices.
The proof for Shannon’s theorem for arrangements is not diﬃcult: we
refer to Roudneﬀ& Sturmfels [467], where several diﬀerent proofs are pre-
sented, and to [96, Thm. 2.1.5]. The interesting thing is that there is no
“entirely combinatorial” proof. In fact, the corresponding statement for
oriented matroids is false. As we will see below, this translates into very
interesting eﬀects for “zonotopal tilings.”
7.4
Nonrealizable Oriented Matroids
We have by now seen so many oriented matroids around that you shouldn’t
be scared any more if you hit their axiomatic deﬁnition a few lines down.
In fact, the axioms below just describe abstractly the “most important”
properties shared by the sign vector systems of — equivalently —
• hyperplane arrangements
• zonotopes
• vector conﬁgurations
• aﬃne point conﬁgurations (vertices of polytopes!).
We have seen that in each of these cases we get a sign vector system of the
form V∗= SIGN(U), for a linear subspace U ⊆Rn.
For the following, choose V∗to arise from any one of the above models:
perhaps it is best to take A = {H1, . . . , Hn} to be an oriented, essential
arrangement of hyperplanes, and let V∗be the set of sign vectors of all its
cones. (For example, take the one sketched in the proof of Theorem 7.16.)
We need the following operations on sign vectors. The zero vector 0 and
the negative −u of a sign vector u have their obvious meanings. The support

7.4 Nonrealizable Oriented Matroids
209
of a sign vector u is supp(u) := {i : ui̸ = 0}. The composition of two vectors
u, v is deﬁned componentwise by
(u ◦v)i :=

ui
if ui̸ = 0,
vi
otherwise.
The separation set for u, v is deﬁned by
S(u, v) := {i : ui = −vi̸ = 0}.
Finally, if j ∈S(u, v), we say that w eliminates j between u and v if
wj = 0 and wi = (u ◦v)i for all i /∈S(u, v).
This may look like a lot of deﬁnitions, but they all have very concrete
meanings for (sets) of sign vectors, and a concrete geometric interpretation,
as follows.
Deﬁnition 7.21 (Oriented matroids).
A collection V∗⊆{+, −, 0}n is the set of covectors of an oriented matroid
if it satisﬁes the following covector axioms:
(V0) 0 ∈V∗
(“The zero covector is always a covector”)
(V1) u ∈V∗=⇒−u ∈V∗
(“The negative of a covector is always a covector”)
(V2) u, v ∈V∗=⇒u ◦v ∈V∗
(“The set of covectors is closed under composition”)
(V3) u, v ∈V∗, j ∈S(u, v) =⇒∃w ∈V∗: w eliminates j between u and v
(“The set of covectors admits elimination”)
The rank of the oriented matroid V∗is the largest number r such that V∗
contains a chain of covectors of length r:
0 < X1 < X2 < · · · < Xr
with Xi ∈V∗.
In this case, we write r(V∗) = r for the rank of V∗.
Proposition 7.22.
Consider a linear subspace U ⊆Rn of dimension r.
Then the set of column sign vectors
SIGN(U) = {sign(u) : u ∈U} ⊆{+, −, 0}n
is the covector set of an oriented matroid of rank r.
(This proves that the realizable oriented matroids M(V ), as given by
Deﬁnition 6.5, are indeed oriented matroids of rank r in the sense of Deﬁ-
nition 7.21, if we use U := Val(V ) to derive the covector system V∗.)

210
7. Fans, Arrangements, Zonotopes, and Tilings
Proof. This is easy, but important, because it provides the “geometric
meaning” of the axioms and of the operations on sign vectors.
The hyperplanes {xi = 0} induce an essential hyperplane arrangement
in U, via Hi := {x ∈U : xi = 0}. For these hyperplanes within U,
positive sides are uniquely determined via H+
i = {x ∈U : xi ≥0}. With
this construction, we see that (V∗, ≤) is the face poset of the essential,
oriented hyperplane arrangement H = {H1, . . . , Hn} in U. Thus this poset
has length r.
For axiom (V0), we note that 0 ∈U has the sign 0 = sign(0) ∈SIGN(U).
For (V1), take u = sign(u) for some u ∈U. From u ∈U =⇒−u ∈U we
get −u = −sign(u) = sign(−u) ∈SIGN(U).
The idea for the composition operation in (V2) is that if u, v ∈U, then
for any ε ∈R we have u + εv ∈U.
u
v
u + εv
Now, for any u, v ∈Rn, if ε > 0 is small enough, then we get sign(u) ◦
sign(v) = sign(u + εv) — this is easy to see by looking at the sign vectors
componentwise. From this we obtain sign(u) ◦sign(v) ∈SIGN(U).
For elimination as in (V3), we use that with u, v ∈U, general linear
combinations of u and v are contained in U, in particular the combination
w := ujv −vju. Now if uj > 0 and vj < 0, then this is a positive linear
combination of the two vectors u and v.
u
v
w = ujv −vju
Hj
Considering the individual components of the sign vectors, we see that the
jth coordinate of w is zero. Similarly, if the ith coordinates of u and v
don’t have opposite sign, then the ith coordinate of any positive linear
combination has the sign sign(wi) = (u ◦v)i, as required.

7.4 Nonrealizable Oriented Matroids
211
The axioms of Deﬁnition 7.21 provide an entirely combinatorial model
for the geometry of hyperplane arrangements, vector conﬁgurations, point
conﬁgurations, or zonotopes. There are two (closely related) questions that
we will not avoid here:
• How good is this model — how closely do the combinatorics of ori-
ented matroids represent a situation of an actual geometric object in
real space?
• What is this model good for?
In the following, we try to answer both questions.
Remark 7.23: “How good is the oriented matroid model?”
• The model is excellent. All the basic structural properties that we
have proved in the realizable case in Section 6.3 extend to the case
of general oriented matroids. In particular, we have
• duality (as in Deﬁnition 6.10)
• equivalence of various types of data (as in Corollary 6.9)
• deletion and contraction as basic operations (as in Proposi-
tion 6.11).
• The topological representation theorem of Lawrence [207] [96, Ch. 5]
shows that every oriented matroid is “nearly” realizable: it may not
correspond to a real hyperplane arrangement, but it does correspond
to an arrangement of pseudohyperplanes, which need not be straight
but may be topologically deformed in some mild way.
The rest of this section will sketch this in the case of r = 3, which
corresponds to “arrangements of pseudolines” in the plane, as inves-
tigated by Gr¨unbaum [255]; see also [96, Ch. 6].
• For certain ranges of parameters, in particular for r ≤2, for r ≥n−2,
and for n ≤7, every oriented matroid is realizable, so the model is
perfect.
• Even the nonrealizable oriented matroids come up “in practice.” We
will present one example for this in the next section, where nonreal-
izable oriented matroids appear in the study of zonotopal tilings.
Remark 7.24: “What are oriented matroids good for?”
• Oriented matroids explain constructions like Gale diagrams and the
Lawrence construction (Lecture 6), which are clearly useful and have
various applications.

212
7. Fans, Arrangements, Zonotopes, and Tilings
• Oriented matroids provide a unifying framework, consistent termi-
nology, and widely applicable tools for several areas of geometry.
• Within the last twenty years, an extensive theory for oriented ma-
troids was developed, with many nontrivial results. Results about
oriented matroids are easily transported from one ﬁeld of applications
(e.g., hyperplane arrangements) to another one (like polytopes). For
the existing body of theory, we refer to the book by Bj¨orner et al. [96],
and the handbook chapter by Bokowski [112].
• The theory of oriented matroids allows us to handle, in a precise
sense, the combinatorics of objects that are geometric (like certain
simplicial spheres) but that cannot be represented in real “Euclidean
space” (or at least not as polytopes).
• Thus, oriented matroids appear as a natural intermediate step in the
classiﬁcation of (simplicial) spheres into polytopes and nonpolytopes:
this approach was pioneered by Bokowski; see [20] [16] [117] and the
monograph by Bokowski & Sturmfels [118].
We will now start to discuss one topic where nonrealizable oriented ma-
troids come up — the study of pseudoline arrangements. To make the
connection, consider an arrangement A of n hyperplanes in Rd (all hyper-
planes through the origin!). To draw and represent this, we consider the
intersection with an aﬃne hyperplane: a hyperplane not through the origin,
but parallel to one of the hyperplanes in the arrangement. Thus we get an
aﬃne hyperplane arrangement Aaﬀ, consisting of n −1 aﬃne hyperplanes.
(Thus, an aﬃne hyperplane need not contain the origin 0, but if we talk
only about a hyperplane, then we mean a linear hyperplane, which contains
the origin.)
The entire geometric combinatorial structure of the hyperplane arrange-
ment A can easily be reconstructed from its “aﬃne picture” Aaﬀ, up to
linear isomorphism, so nothing is lost by this reduction to aﬃne space. In
particular, one can read oﬀthe oriented matroid of A from the arrangement
Aaﬀ, assuming that the hyperplanes in Aaﬀare labeled and that positive
sides are determined.
So in our drawing, for the case d = 3, we obtain an aﬃne arrangement Aaﬀ
of n−1 = 4 lines in the aﬃne (dotted) plane, from an original arrangement

7.4 Nonrealizable Oriented Matroids
213
of 5 hyperplanes, namely the horizontal one, and the 4 planes determined
as the aﬃne hull of the 4 lines together with the origin.
This is how — in the case d = 3 — aﬃne arrangements of lines in R2
represent 3-dimensional (hyper)plane arrangements. Every arrangement of
lines in the plane determines an oriented matroid of rank 3.
However, it turns out that if we have an arrangement of “nonstraight”
lines in the plane, then we can also, in the same way, read oﬀan oriented
matroid of rank 3. There are various — quite general — ways to deﬁne such
“nonstraight” lines. Basically, any type of two-way unbounded topological
curves will do. See Gr¨unbaum [255] or [96, Ch. 6] for general versions. Here,
for simplicity, we will use a simpler version, with the same combinatorial
results.
Deﬁnition 7.25.
A pseudoline is a polygonal curve without self-intersec-
tions, with ﬁnitely many break points in R2, and whose ends “head oﬀto
inﬁnity” in opposite directions.
An arrangement of pseudolines is a ﬁnite set of pseudolines in the plane
such that
(i) any two pseudolines either are disjoint (then we call them parallel), or
they meet in a single point and cross in this point, and
(ii) being parallel is transitive (that is, if a pseudoline intersects one pseu-
doline of a parallel pair, then it also has to intersect the other one).
ℓ1
ℓ2
ℓ3
ℓ4
ℓ5
Now let P be an arrangement of n −1 pseudolines, which have been
labeled ℓ1, . . . , ℓn−1, and where a positive side has been chosen for each of
them. For every X ∈{+, −, 0}n−1, let F X be the set of all those points
x ∈R2 which lie on the positive side of ℓi if XF
i = +, on the negative side
of ℓi if XF
i = −, and on the pseudoline ℓi if XF
i = 0. This set F X may be
empty: if not, it is called the face of P associated with X.

214
7. Fans, Arrangements, Zonotopes, and Tilings
For example, in our next drawing small arrows are used to indicate the
positive side for each pseudoline. The shaded region (without its bound-
ary) is the face associated with X = (−++−−), the bold edge (without
endpoints) is the face associated with (−0+−−), whereas (−+0−−) does
not correspond to a face.
ℓ1
ℓ2
ℓ3
ℓ4
ℓ5
Similarly, we assign labels to the faces at inﬁnity: namely, we get a “face at
inﬁnity” for every unbounded face in P, where we have to take into account
that “parallel lines meet at inﬁnity.” Thus, in the following drawing, the
two bold edges F1, F2 and the shaded unbounded face F, with XF1 =
(−−0−−), XF2 = (−−+0−), and XF = (−−+−−), all determine the
same face GY at inﬁnity, with Y = (−−00−).
ℓ1
ℓ2
ℓ3
ℓ4
ℓ5
F1
F2
F
Theorem 7.26.
Let P = {ℓ1, . . . , ℓn−1} be a labeled arrangement of
pseudolines, for which positive sides have been chosen. Then the family of
sign vectors
V∗(P)
:=
{ (XF , +) : F is a face of P}
∪
{ (Y G, 0 ) : G is a face at inﬁnity for P} ∪{(0, 0)}
∪
{(−XF, −) : F is a face of P}
⊆{+, −, 0}n
is an oriented matroid of rank 3.

7.4 Nonrealizable Oriented Matroids
215
Proof. From an arrangement P of n −1 pseudolines, the previous proce-
dure reconstructs a linear arrangement of n “pseudoplanes” through the
origin in R3, where the nth pseudoplane is a straight plane, corresponding
to the line at inﬁnity in P.
The following drawing shows two pseudoplanes of the resulting arrangement
in R3: the ﬂat one corresponds to the line at inﬁnity for P, and the nonﬂat
one corresponds to a pseudoline in P.
The oriented matroid V∗(P) ⊆{+, −, 0}n arises from this arrangement
in the same way as in the case of a straight arrangement of planes in R3.
Similarly, the proof that the system V∗(P) is an oriented matroid is anal-
ogous to the realizable case in Proposition 7.22 — except that the “linear
algebra arguments” of that proof have to be replaced by “combinatorial
arguments” that remain valid in the nonlinear case.
We leave the details to the reader, and refer to [96, Sect. 5.1], where the
proof is nicely done in even greater generality.
In fact, there is a surprisingly strong theorem available here: Lawrence’s
topological representation theorem states that
every linear arrangement of n pseudohyperplanes in Rd yields an
oriented matroid V∗⊆{+, −, 0}n of rank d.
Theorem 7.26 just presents the case d = 3 of this statement. (We do not
intend to give a precise deﬁnition of arrangements of pseudohyperplanes
here. Intuitively this should be clear; see [96, Ch. 5] for a careful expla-
nation.) The topological representation theorem, however, also includes a
converse:
every oriented matroid on n elements of rank d can be represented
by an arrangement of n linear pseudohyperplanes in Rd, which is
essentially unique.

216
7. Fans, Arrangements, Zonotopes, and Tilings
Thus we have a bijection
oriented matroids
←→
(equivalence classes of) pseudoarrangements.
The second half of the theorem, constructing a pseudoarrangement for a
given oriented matroid, is by far the harder part to prove: it is not easy
even in the special case of d = 3.
Complete proofs of the topological representation theorem have been
given by Folkman & Lawrence [207], by Edmonds & Mandel [191] (who ﬁrst
proved the stronger piecewise linear version corresponding to our version
of polygonal pseudolines), in Bachem & Kern [35], and in Bj¨orner et al.
[96, Chs. 4 and 5].
Deﬁnition 7.27.
Two arrangements of pseudolines are combinatorially
equivalent if — possibly after relabeling, and after change of the positive
sides — they have the same oriented matroid.
An arrangement of pseudolines P is realizable (or stretchable) if it is
combinatorially equivalent to a (straight) arrangement of lines, that is, if
the oriented matroid V∗(P) is realizable.
Are pseudoline arrangements really more general than line arrangements?
Or is every pseudoline arrangement stretchable? Well, nonrealizable pseu-
doline arrangements do exist, and they are not even that hard to construct.
The following construction of a nonrealizable pseudoline arrangement al-
ready appeared in Levi’s 1926 paper [362], the ﬁrst paper on pseudoline
arrangements ever written (as far as I know).
Example 7.28.
(Levi [362]) Consider the following arrangement of 8 lines
in the plane, the well-known Pappus conﬁguration.
Pappus’ theorem states that the three black dots are collinear in every line
arrangement that is combinatorially equivalent to this arrangement. This
implies that there is no straight representation of the following pseudoline

7.5 Zonotopal Tilings
217
arrangement, the non-Pappus conﬁguration.
However, this pseudoline arrangement does give an oriented matroid via
Theorem 7.26 (uniquely, if we number the pseudolines and specify a positive
side for each of them), the non-Pappus oriented matroid MnP . This is an
oriented matroid of rank 3 on 10 elements. However, if we delete the element
that corresponds to the line at inﬁnity, then we get an oriented matroid
M′
nP on 9 elements which is nonrealizable as well, since the line at inﬁnity
was not needed for the nonrealizability argument.
There are even nonrealizable pseudoline arrangements that are simple (no
three pseudolines cross in a point or are parallel) — see Ringel [463] [255,
p. 42] and Exercise 7.16 for an example with only 9 pseudolines in the
plane. In fact, all (simple or nonsimple) arrangements of pseudolines with
at most 8 pseudolines are realizable (for this count the line at inﬁnity, if
it is there), and Ringel’s example is essentially the unique simple one with
9 pseudolines, according to Richter [455].
7.5
Zonotopal Tilings
What do you “see” if you “look at” a d-dimensional zonotope? You see its
“front facets,” which are (d −1)-dimensional facets and which ﬁll a shape
that is a projection of a zonotope, and thus is a zonotope itself.
If d = 3 (where this is most likely to happen to you anyway), and you
look from a point very far away, the picture might look like the drawing on
the next page. Here the shape you see is a 10-gon, ﬁlled “face to face” by
quadrilaterals and hexagons.
In general, the shape you see is a (parallel) projection of a zonotope,
which is a zonotope itself. It is covered by the images of the front facets of
the zonotope, which are also zonotopes.
