[문서 맥락]
책: Lectures on Polytopes / 저자: Günter M. Ziegler
챕터: 8. Shellability and the Upper Bound Theorem
현재 소단원: 8.2 Shelling Polytopes
직전 소단원: 「8.1 Shellable and Nonshellable Complexes」
[본문]
8.2 Shelling Polytopes
239
Now assume that the resulting simplicial complex C is shellable. We start
with one tetrahedron F1, and then add new ones, F2, F3, . . .. At every step,
except possibly the ﬁrst, not more than one new edge from the set E12 can
be added, since the edges in one of the triangles cannot be in a common
simplex, and if two skew edges were new, then this would contradict a
characteristic property of shellings of simplicial complexes: there has to be
a unique minimal new face at each step, which is nonempty after the ﬁrst
step (see Exercise 8.2).
Now let Fj+1 be the tetrahedron by which the last edge e from E12 is
added. At this point of the shelling the complex Cj := C(F1, . . . , Fj) already
contains the three edges e1, e2, e3 that surround e. In fact, the circle formed
in Cj by C := e1 ∪e2 ∪e3 can be contracted within the complex Cj: this is
a property of shellable complexes of dimension at least 2, which is easy to
verify by induction (they are “simply connected”).
v
e
Since the circle C surrounds the edge e, we have to “pass over” a vertex
v ⊆e when we contract C in Cj. Also, the link of this vertex v in the
complex Cj, link(v, Cj), is a 2-dimensional shellable complex, by Lemma 8.7.
However, we can contract our circle C within |Cj| until it lies in link(v, Cj),
but it cannot be contracted within the link, because then it would not pass
over v. This shows that the link is not shellable: contradiction.
8.2
Shelling Polytopes
The complex of a polytope C(P) is shellable if and only if the boundary
complex C(∂P) is shellable. Thus, “shelling a polytope” means ﬁnding a
shelling order for the facets of P. How do we do this? Is there an obvious

240
8. Shellability and the Upper Bound Theorem
way? If we polarize, then the problem is to ﬁnd a good ordering on the
vertices of the polar polytope P ∆. For this an obvious thing to do is to
take a linear function in general position (see Sections 3.1 and 3.4), and
to order the vertices according to that linear function. This works: it does
yield a shelling (in fact, many shellings) for the boundary of P.
Below we describe these shellings directly on P, without polarization. In
Exercise 8.10 you are asked to check that the constructions on P and P ∆
really are equivalent.
Lemma 8.10.
If F1, F2, . . . , Fs is a shelling order for the boundary of a
polytope P, then so is the reverse order Fs, Fs−1, . . . , F1.
Proof. Let Fj be one of the facets in the shelling, then for every facet G of
Fj there is a unique other facet Fi of P such that G = Fj ∩Fi. This other
facet Fi can be either earlier (i < j) or later (i > j) than Fj. These roles
are interchanged if, while reversing the shelling of ∂P, we also reverse the
shellings of the boundaries of its facets: and this we may do, by induction
on the dimension.
Theorem 8.11.
(Bruggesser & Mani [139])
Polytopes are shellable.
Well, this is the essence. However, what one actually needs is that there
are shellings with very speciﬁc properties. These are obtained from the
Bruggesser-Mani construction, which yields the much more speciﬁc theorem
below (which includes later reﬁnements by McMullen [389], Danaraj & Klee
[171], and by Bj¨orner & Wachs [98]). Also, this is the technical statement
that has an easy proof by induction on the dimension.
x
Theorem 8.12.
[139]
Let P ⊆Rd be a d-polytope, and let x ∈Rd be a
point outside P. If x lies in general position (that is, not in the aﬃne hull
of a facet of P), then the boundary complex C(∂P) has a shelling in which
the facets of P that are visible from x come ﬁrst.

8.2 Shelling Polytopes
241
Here we can use our intuition to understand what visible means: a facet
F ⊆P is visible from x if for every y ∈F the closed line segment [x, y]
intersects P only in the point y. Equivalently, F is visible from x if and
only if x and int(P) are on diﬀerent sides of the hyperplane aﬀ(F) spanned
by F. For example, if xG is beyond the face G (in the sense of Section 3.1),
then the facets that contain G are exactly those that are visible from xG.
Proof. Given x, we choose a line ℓthrough x and through a point in
general position in P. The properties we need are that ℓcontains x, hits
the interior of P, and the intersection points with the facet hyperplanes
ℓ∩aﬀ(F) are distinct. For simplicity, assume that the line is not parallel to
any of the facet hyperplanes, so we have no intersection point “at inﬁnity.”
We orient the line ℓfrom P to x.
F1
F1
F1
F2
aﬀ(F2)
Now imagine P to be a little polyhedral planet, and have a rocket start
on its surface at the point where the oriented line ℓleaves the planet. This
point lies on a unique facet F1, and for the ﬁrst few minutes of the ﬂight
only this one facet F1 is visible from the rocket.
F1
F2
F3
F5
F4

242
8. Shellability and the Upper Bound Theorem
After a while, a new facet will appear on the horizon: the rocket passes
through a hyperplane aﬀ(F2), and we label the corresponding facet F2.
Continuing this, we label the facets F3, F4, . . . in the order in which the
rocket passes through their hyperplanes, that is, in the order in which the
facets appear on the horizon, becoming visible from the rocket. Now we pass
through inﬁnity, and imagine that the rocket comes back to the planet from
the opposite side. We continue the shelling by taking the facets in the order
in which we pass through the hyperplanes aﬀ(Fi), that is, in the order in
which the corresponding facets disappear on the horizon.
This “rocket ﬂight” clearly gives us a well-deﬁned ordering on the whole
set of facets. Also, the facets that are visible from x form a beginning
segment, since we see exactly those at the point where the rocket passes
through x.
To see that the ordering is a shelling, we consider the intersection ∂Fj ∩
(F1 ∪· · · ∪Fj−1). If Fj is added before we pass through inﬁnity, then this
intersection is exactly the set of those facets of Fj that are visible from the
point ℓ∩aﬀ(Fj), at which Fj appears on the horizon. Thus, we know by
induction on the dimension that this collection of facets of Fj is shellable,
and can be continued to a shelling of the whole boundary ∂Fj.
3
2
1
Fj
aﬀ(Fj)
After passing through inﬁnity, the intersection is the family of nonvisible
facets. This is shellable, too, because reversing the orientation of the line ℓ
yields the shelling with the reversed ordering of the facets.
Shellings that arise by Bruggesser & Mani’s construction are also known
as line shellings. Note that in this construction, reversing the orientation

8.2 Shelling Polytopes
243
of the line ℓalso reverses the line shelling. Thus the reverse of every line
shelling is not only a shelling (by Lemma 8.10), but a line shelling as well.
The Bruggesser-Mani construction has a lot of ﬂexibility: we can get
shellings with special properties by suitable choice of the shelling line ℓ.
Corollary 8.13.
For any two facets F and F ′ of a polytope P, there is a
shelling of ∂P in which F is the ﬁrst facet and F ′ is the last one.
For every vertex v of P, there is a shelling such that the facets that
contain v form a beginning segment of the shelling, that is, the star of the
vertex v is shelled ﬁrst.
F ′
F
F1
F2
v
Proof. For the ﬁrst claim, choose any shelling line ℓwhich intersects the
boundary of P in the facets F and F ′. (For example, choose x beyond F,
choose x′ beyond F ′, and let ℓbe the line determined by x and x′. Perturb
ℓto general position, if necessary.)
For the second claim, let xv be a point beyond the vertex v, and choose
the shelling line to contain this xv.
Corollary 8.14.
Every Schlegel diagram is shellable.
More generally, every regular subdivision of a polytope is shellable.
Proof. For any Schlegel diagram D(P, F), choose a shelling of the polytope
P such that the facet F comes last. Thus the shelling of P also induces a
shelling of the Schlegel diagram D(P, F).
Every regular subdivision ΣP (Q) of a d-polytope Q is, by Deﬁnition 5.3,
isomorphic to the complex of faces of a (d+1)-polytope P that are vis-
ible from a certain point x = −Ted+1: and thus we can apply Theo-
rem 8.12.
This corollary applies to piles of cubes (Example 8.2(v)), for example. It
suggests that every d-diagram is shellable. Is that true? (Problem 8.3*)
Knowing that polytopes are shellable, one might ask whether they are
extendably shellable. Here we answer this question in the negative, and
give in fact several proofs.
Theorem 8.15.
Not all 4-polytopes are extendably shellable.
In particular, eP4(7, 7, 3) and eP4(7, 5, 5) are not extendably shellable.

244
8. Shellability and the Upper Bound Theorem
Proof. (1)
Consider the 4-polytope P4 := eP4(9, 9, 4), which contains
a combinatorially equivalent copy of the pile of cubes P3(9, 9, 4) on its
boundary. Now we start a shelling of ∂P4 with the facets that correspond
to the nonextendable partial shelling of P3(9, 9, 4) given in Lemma 8.6. This
partial shelling has two connected parts in common with the boundary of
the box B := |P3(9, 9, 4)|. Any facet of P4 that we can add to continue
the partial shelling of ∂P4 will be connected to one of these parts of the
boundary of the box, but not to both. Thus, the “missing cubes” from the
box cannot be added to the partial shelling of ∂P4 at a later time, either.
This proves that eP4(9, 9, 4) is not extendably shellable. In fact, it also
proves that any 4-polytope that contains an isomorphic copy of P3(9, 9, 4)
in its boundary complex is not extendably shellable. So, eP4(z1, z2, z3) is
not extendably shellable for z1 ≥9, z2 ≥9, and z3 ≥4.
(2) We delete the “bottom layer” and the “walls” of the pile P3(9, 9, 4),
to obtain P3(7, 7, 3). Now consider the Schlegel diagram of eP4(7, 7, 3), and
start shelling it by ﬁrst shelling the 5 facets below and next to the pile
of cubes. (This replaces the little cubes in the bottom and the walls of
our previous example.) We continue the shelling by the 49 little cubes
that correspond to the interior cubes in the not-extendable conﬁguration
of Lemma 8.6. If we lift this partial shelling of the Schlegel diagram to the
boundary of eP4(7, 7, 3), then we can also add the facet on which the dia-
gram was based: after that we are stuck. Thus eP4(7, 7, 3) is not extendably
shellable.
(3) Start a shelling of P ′
4 := eP4(7, 5, 5) at the facet F1 that is completely
disjoint from the pile of cubes. Then the remaining facets are the ones in
the Schlegel diagram D(P ′
4, F1). Of this Schlegel diagram we next add the
bottom and the top facet to the shelling, as F2 and F3. Then, from the
pile of cubes isomorphic to P3(7, 5, 5), we take little cubes F4, F5, . . . along
a knotted curve that connects the bottom facet to the top facet of the
Schlegel diagram, as suggested by the drawing on the next page. All this
yields legal shelling steps, until one reaches the last (white) cube, which is
in the top layer of the pile of boxes.
However, now the complex contains a knotted curve, for which all edges
except for one are on the boundary of the subcomplex that we have shelled
at this point. This knotted curve would be completed by the little white
cube from the top layer. Now if we continue the shelling elsewhere, then
there remains to be a knotted curve of this type: so the little white cube
in the drawing cannot be added to the shelling in a later step, either. Thus
this partial shelling of eP4(7, 5, 5) cannot be completed.
The third proof for Theorem 8.15 can also be adapted to see that nei-
ther simple polytopes, nor simplicial polytopes, are extendably shellable in
general. Also, it can be generalized to see that “most” 4-polytopes are not
extendably shellable. We refer to [575].

8.2 Shelling Polytopes
245
4
5
6
8
9
....
10
 11
7
Shellings of polytopes allow us to “build up” the boundary of a poly-
tope step by step, adding one facet at a time. Thus one can do proofs by
induction on the number j of facets in the complex
Cj := C(F1 ∪F2 ∪· · · ∪Fj),
which represents a shellable part of the boundary of a polytope.
Our ﬁrst, simple but classical, application of this technique will prove
the Euler-Poincar´e formula.
Deﬁnition 8.16.
The f-vector of a d-dimensional polyhedral complex C
is the vector
f(C)
=
(f−1, f0, f1, . . . , fd) ∈Nd+2,
where fk = fk(C) denotes the number of k-dimensional faces in C.
By the f-vector of a d-polytope we mean the f-vector of its boundary
complex:
f(P)
:=
f(C(∂P)) = (f−1, f0, f1, . . . , fd−1) ∈Nd+1.
Note that all the f-vectors we consider start with the entry f−1 = 1,
corresponding to the empty face. The f-vectors of polytopes satisfy only
one nontrivial linear equation: the Euler-Poincar´e formula.

246
8. Shellability and the Upper Bound Theorem
Corollary 8.17 (Euler-Poincar´e formula).
For every d-dimensional polytope,
f0 −f1 + · · · + (−1)d−1fd−1
=
1 −(−1)d.
Proof. In order to do induction, we need to consider the alternating sum
of face numbers for general polytopal complexes. For this we deﬁne the
(reduced) Euler characteristic χ(D) of a polyhedral complex of dimension
at most d, by
χ(D)
:=
−f−1 + f0 −f1 + · · · + (−1)dfd.
Now if D and D′ are polytopal complexes such that the union is a polytopal
complex too (that is, if F ∩F ′ ∈D ∩D′ for F ∈D, F ′ ∈D′), then the
Euler characteristic is additive:
χ(D) + χ(D′)
=
χ(D ∪D′) + χ(D ∩D′).
We prove by induction on d that the complex of a polytope C(P) always
has Euler characteristic 0, and thus its boundary has Euler characteristic
(−1)d−1:
χ(C(P)) = 0,
χ(C(∂P)) = (−1)d−1.
This is clear for d ≤1. Now if P is a d-polytope with shelling order
F1, F2, . . ., then we have more precisely that
χ(C(F1 ∪F2 ∪· · · ∪Fj))
=
 0
for 1 ≤j < fd−1
(−1)d−1
for j = fd−1
— which follows by induction on j and dimension, since the facets Fj
that we add in are (d −1)-polytopes, the Euler characteristic is additive,
and the intersection Fj ∩(S
i<j Fi) is a shellable part of, but not the whole
boundary of Fj, for j < fd−1. This last fact is immediate from Lemma 8.10,
or geometrically in the special case of a line shelling.
8.3
h-Vectors and Dehn-Sommerville Equations
From now on, to the end of this lecture, all polytopes are simplicial.
For simplicial polytopes, the combinatorics of shellings can be described
even more concretely. For the following let P be a simplicial d-polytope, so
its boundary is a simplicial complex C := C(∂P) of dimension d −1. Let
V := vert(P) be the vertex set of P of size n := f0(P).
We identify the proper faces of P with their vertex sets — that is, we
identify the “geometric simplicial complex C” with the “abstract simplicial
