[문서 맥락]
책: Complex Analysis / 저자: Elias M. Stein & Rami Shakarchi
챕터: 3. Meromorphic Functions and the Logarithm
현재 소단원: 3.1 Zeros and poles
직전 소단원: 「2.7 Problems」
[본문]
3 Meromorphic Functions and
the Logarithm
One knows that the diﬀerential calculus, which has
contributed so much to the progress of analysis, is
founded on the consideration of diﬀerential coeﬃcients,
that is derivatives of functions. When one attributes
an inﬁnitesimal increase ϵ to the variable x, the func-
tion f(x) of this variable undergoes in general an in-
ﬁnitesimal increase of which the ﬁrst term is propor-
tional to ϵ, and the ﬁnite coeﬃcient of ϵ of this in-
crease is what is called its diﬀerential coeﬃcient... If
considering the values of x where f(x) becomes inﬁ-
nite, we add to one of these values designated by x1,
the inﬁnitesimal ϵ, and then develop f(x1 + ϵ) in in-
creasing power of the same quantity, the ﬁrst terms
of this development contain negative powers of ϵ; one
of these will be the product of 1/ϵ with a ﬁnite coef-
ﬁcient, which we will call the residue of the function
f(x), relative to the particular value x1 of the variable
x. Residues of this kind present themselves naturally
in several branches of algebraic and inﬁnitesimal anal-
ysis. Their consideration furnish methods that can be
simply used, that apply to a large number of diverse
questions, and that give new formulae that would seem
to be of interest to mathematicians...
A. L. Cauchy, 1826
There is a general principle in the theory, already implicit in Riemann’s
work, which states that analytic functions are in an essential way charac-
terized by their singularities. That is to say, globally analytic functions
are “eﬀectively” determined by their zeros, and meromorphic functions
by their zeros and poles. While these assertions cannot be formulated
as precise general theorems, there are nevertheless signiﬁcant instances
where this principle applies.
We begin this chapter by considering singularities, in particular the
diﬀerent kind of point singularities (“isolated” singularities) that a holo-
morphic function can have. In order of increasing severity, these are:
• removable singularities

72
Chapter 3. MEROMORPHIC FUNCTIONS AND THE LOGARITHM
• poles
• essential singularities.
The ﬁrst type is harmless since a function can actually be extended
to be holomorphic at its removable singularities (hence the name). Near
the third type, the function oscillates and may grow faster than any
power, and a complete understanding of its behavior is not easy. For the
second type the analysis is more straight forward and is connected with
the calculus of residues, which arises as follows.
Recall that by Cauchy’s theorem a holomorphic function f in an open
set which contains a closed curve γ and its interior satisﬁes

γ
f(z) dz = 0.
The question that occurs is: what happens if f has a pole in the interior
of the curve? To try to answer this question consider the example f(z) =
1/z, and recall that if C is a (positively oriented) circle centered at 0,
then

C
dz
z = 2πi.
This turns out to be the key ingredient in the calculus of residues.
A new aspect appears when we consider indeﬁnite integrals of holomor-
phic functions that have singularities. As the basic example f(z) = 1/z
shows, the resulting “function” (in this case the logarithm) may not be
single-valued, and understanding this phenomenon is of importance for
a number of subjects. Exploiting this multi-valuedness leads in eﬀect to
the “argument principle.” We can use this principle to count the number
of zeros of a holomorphic function inside a suitable curve. As a simple
consequence of this result, we obtain a signiﬁcant geometric property of
holomorphic functions: they are open mappings. From this, the maxi-
mum principle, another important feature of holomorphic functions, is
an easy step.
In order to turn to the logarithm itself, and come to grips with the
precise nature of its multi-valuedness, we introduce the notions of homo-
topy of curves and simply connected domains. It is on the latter type of
open sets that single-valued branches of the logarithm can be deﬁned.
1 Zeros and poles
By deﬁnition, a point singularity of a function f is a complex number
z0 such that f is deﬁned in a neighborhood of z0 but not at the point

1. Zeros and poles
73
z0 itself.
We shall also call such points isolated singularities.
For
example, if the function f is deﬁned only on the punctured plane by
f(z) = z, then the origin is a point singularity. Of course, in that case,
the function f can actually be deﬁned at 0 by setting f(0) = 0, so that
the resulting extension is continuous and in fact entire. (Such points
are then called removable singularities.)
More interesting is the case
of the function g(z) = 1/z deﬁned in the punctured plane. It is clear
now that g cannot be deﬁned as a continuous function, much less as
a holomorphic function, at the point 0. In fact, g(z) grows to inﬁnity
as z approaches 0, and we shall say that the origin is a pole singularity.
Finally, the case of the function h(z) = e1/z on the punctured plane shows
that removable singularities and poles do not tell the whole story. Indeed,
the function h(z) grows indeﬁnitely as z approaches 0 on the positive real
line, while h approaches 0 as z goes to 0 on the negative real axis. Finally
h oscillates rapidly, yet remains bounded, as z approaches the origin on
the imaginary axis.
Since singularities often appear because the denominator of a frac-
tion vanishes, we begin with a local study of the zeros of a holomorphic
function.
A complex number z0 is a zero for the holomorphic function f if
f(z0) = 0. In particular, analytic continuation shows that the zeros of
a non-trivial holomorphic function are isolated. In other words, if f is
holomorphic in Ωand f(z0) = 0 for some z0 ∈Ω, then there exists an
open neighborhood U of z0 such that f(z)̸ = 0 for all z ∈U −{z0}, unless
f is identically zero. We start with a local description of a holomorphic
function near a zero.
Theorem 1.1 Suppose that f is holomorphic in a connected open set Ω,
has a zero at a point z0 ∈Ω, and does not vanish identically in Ω. Then
there exists a neighborhood U ⊂Ωof z0, a non-vanishing holomorphic
function g on U, and a unique positive integer n such that
f(z) = (z −z0)ng(z)
for all z ∈U.
Proof.
Since Ωis connected and f is not identically zero, we conclude
that f is not identically zero in a neighborhood of z0. In a small disc
centered at z0 the function f has a power series expansion
f(z) =
∞

k=0
ak(z −z0)k.
Since f is not identically zero near z0, there exists a smallest integer n

74
Chapter 3. MEROMORPHIC FUNCTIONS AND THE LOGARITHM
such that an̸ = 0. Then, we can write
f(z) = (z −z0)n[an + an+1(z −z0) + · · · ] = (z −z0)ng(z) ,
where g is deﬁned by the series in brackets, and hence is holomorphic,
and is nowhere vanishing for all z close to z0 (since an̸ = 0). To prove
the uniqueness of the integer n, suppose that we can also write
f(z) = (z −z0)ng(z) = (z −z0)mh(z)
where h(z0)̸ = 0. If m > n, then we may divide by (z −z0)n to see that
g(z) = (z −z0)m−nh(z)
and letting z →z0 yields g(z0) = 0, a contradiction. If m < n a similar
argument gives h(z0) = 0, which is also a contradiction. We conclude
that m = n, thus h = g, and the theorem is proved.
In the case of the above theorem, we say that f has a zero of order
n (or multiplicity n) at z0. If a zero is of order 1, we say that it is
simple. We observe that, quantitatively, the order describes the rate at
which the function vanishes.
The importance of the previous theorem comes from the fact that
we can now describe precisely the type of singularity possessed by the
function 1/f at z0.
For this purpose, it is now convenient to deﬁne a deleted neighbor-
hood of z0 to be an open disc centered at z0, minus the point z0, that
is, the set
{z : 0 < |z −z0| < r}
for some r > 0.
Then, we say that a function f deﬁned in a deleted
neighborhood of z0 has a pole at z0, if the function 1/f, deﬁned to be
zero at z0, is holomorphic in a full neighborhood of z0.
Theorem 1.2 If f has a pole at z0 ∈Ω, then in a neighborhood of that
point there exist a non-vanishing holomorphic function h and a unique
positive integer n such that
f(z) = (z −z0)−nh(z).
Proof.
By the previous theorem we have 1/f(z) = (z −z0)ng(z),
where g is holomorphic and non-vanishing in a neighborhood of z0, so
the result follows with h(z) = 1/g(z).

1. Zeros and poles
75
The integer n is called the order (or multiplicity) of the pole, and
describes the rate at which the function grows near z0. If the pole is of
order 1, we say that it is simple.
The next theorem should be reminiscent of power series expansion,
except that now we allow terms of negative order, to account for the
presence of a pole.
Theorem 1.3 If f has a pole of order n at z0, then
(1)
f(z) =
a−n
(z −z0)n +
a−n+1
(z −z0)n−1 + · · · +
a−1
(z −z0) + G(z) ,
where G is a holomorphic function in a neighborhood of z0.
Proof.
The proof follows from the multiplicative statement in the
previous theorem. Indeed, the function h has a power series expansion
h(z) = A0 + A1(z −z0) + · · ·
so that
f(z) = (z −z0)−n(A0 + A1(z −z0) + · · · )
=
a−n
(z −z0)n +
a−n+1
(z −z0)n−1 + · · · +
a−1
(z −z0) + G(z).
The sum
a−n
(z −z0)n +
a−n+1
(z −z0)n−1 + · · · +
a−1
(z −z0)
is called the principal part of f at the pole z0, and the coeﬃcient a−1 is
the residue of f at that pole. We write resz0f = a−1. The importance of
the residue comes from the fact that all the other terms in the principal
part, that is, those of order strictly greater than 1, have primitives in a
deleted neighborhood of z0. Therefore, if P(z) denotes the principal part
above and C is any circle centered at z0, we get
1
2πi

C
P(z) dz = a−1.
We shall return to this important point in the section on the residue
formula.
As we shall see, in many cases, the evaluation of integrals reduces to
the calculation of residues. In the case when f has a simple pole at z0,
it is clear that
resz0f = lim
z→z0(z −z0)f(z).

76
Chapter 3. MEROMORPHIC FUNCTIONS AND THE LOGARITHM
If the pole is of higher order, a similar formula holds, one that involves
diﬀerentiation as well as taking a limit.
Theorem 1.4 If f has a pole of order n at z0, then
resz0f = lim
z→z0
1
(n −1)!
 d
dz
n−1
(z −z0)nf(z).
The theorem is an immediate consequence of formula (1), which implies
(z −z0)nf(z) = a−n + a−n+1(z −z0) + · · · + a−1(z −z0)n−1 +
+G(z)(z −z0)n.
2 The residue formula
We now discuss the celebrated residue formula. Our approach follows the
discussion of Cauchy’s theorem in the last chapter: we ﬁrst consider the
case of the circle and its interior the disc, and then explain generalizations
to toy contours and their interiors.
Theorem 2.1 Suppose that f is holomorphic in an open set containing
a circle C and its interior, except for a pole at z0 inside C. Then

C
f(z) dz = 2πi resz0f.
Proof.
Once again, we may choose a keyhole contour that avoids the
pole, and let the width of the corridor go to zero to see that

C
f(z) dz =

Cϵ
f(z) dz
where Cϵ is the small circle centered at the pole z0 and of radius ϵ.
Now we observe that
1
2πi

Cϵ
a−1
z −z0
dz = a−1
is an immediate consequence of the Cauchy integral formula (Theo-
rem 4.1 of the previous chapter), applied to the constant function f =
a−1. Similarly,
1
2πi

Cϵ
a−k
(z −z0)k dz = 0
