[문서 맥락]
책: Complex Analysis / 저자: Elias M. Stein & Rami Shakarchi
챕터: 7. The Zeta Function and Prime Number Theorem
현재 소단원: 7.intro 개관 (도입부)
직전 소단원: 「6.4 Problems」
[본문]
7 The Zeta Function and Prime
Number Theorem
Bernhard Riemann, whose extraordinary intuitive pow-
ers we have already mentioned, has especially reno-
vated our knowledge of the distribution of prime num-
bers, also one of the most mysterious questions in
mathematics. He has taught us to deduce results in
that line from considerations borrowed from the in-
tegral calculus: more precisely, from the study of a
certain quantity, a function of a variable s which may
assume not only real, but also imaginary values. He
proved some important properties of that function,
but enunciated two or three as important ones with-
out giving the proof. At the death of Riemann, a note
was found among his papers, saying “These properties
of ζ(s) (the function in question) are deduced from an
expression of it which, however, I did not succeed in
simplifying enough to publish it.”
We still have not the slightest idea of what the
expression could be. As to the properties he simply
enunciated, some thirty years elapsed before I was able
to prove all of them but one. The question concern-
ing that last one remains unsolved as yet, though, by
an immense labor pursued throughout this last half
century, some highly interesting discoveries in that di-
rection have been achieved. It seems more and more
probable, but still not at all certain, that the “Rie-
mann hypothesis” is true.
J. Hadamard, 1945
Euler found, through his product formula for the zeta function, a
deep connection between analytical methods and arithmetic properties
of numbers, in particular primes. An easy consequence of Euler’s for-
mula is that the sum of the reciprocals of all primes, 
p 1/p, diverges,
a result that quantiﬁes the fact that there are inﬁnitely many prime
numbers.
The natural problem then becomes that of understanding
how these primes are distributed. With this in mind, we consider the

182
Chapter 7. THE ZETA FUNCTION AND PRIME NUMBER THEOREM
following function:
π(x) = number of primes less than or equal to x.
The erratic growth of the function π(x) gives little hope of ﬁnding a
simple formula for it. Instead, one is led to study the asymptotic behavior
of π(x) as x becomes large.
About 60 years after Euler’s discovery,
Legendre and Gauss observed after numerous calculations that it was
likely that
(1)
π(x) ∼
x
log x
as x →∞.
(The
asymptotic
relation
f(x) ∼g(x)
as x →∞
means that
f(x)/g(x) →1 as x →∞.) Another 60 years later, shortly before Rie-
mann’s work, Tchebychev proved by elementary methods (and in partic-
ular, without the zeta function) the weaker result that
(2)
π(x) ≈
x
log x
as x →∞.
Here, by deﬁnition, the symbol ≈means that there are positive constants
A < B such that
A
x
log x ≤π(x) ≤B
x
log x
for all suﬃciently large x.
In 1896, about 40 years after Tchebychev’s result, Hadamard and de
la Vall´ee Poussin gave a proof of the validity of the relation (1). Their
result is known as the prime number theorem. The original proofs of
this theorem, as well as the one we give below, use complex analysis.
We should remark that since then other proofs have been found, some
depending on complex analysis, and others more elementary in nature.
At the heart of the proof of the prime number theorem that we give
below lies the fact that ζ(s) does not vanish on the line Re(s) = 1. In
fact, it can be shown that these two propositions are equivalent.
1 Zeros of the zeta function
We have seen in Theorem 1.10, Chapter 8 in Book I, Euler’s identity,
which states that for Re(s) > 1 the zeta function can be expressed as an
inﬁnite product
ζ(s) =

p
1
1 −p−s .
