[문서 맥락]
책: Complex Analysis / 저자: Elias M. Stein & Rami Shakarchi
챕터: 8. Conformal Mappings
현재 소단원: 8.2.2 Automorphisms of the upper half-plane
직전 소단원: 「8.2.1 Automorphisms of the disc」
[본문]
2. The Schwarz lemma; automorphisms of the disc and upper half-plane
221
Corollary 2.3 The only automorphisms of the unit disc that ﬁx the ori-
gin are the rotations.
Note that by the use of the mappings ψα, we can see that the group of
automorphisms of the disc acts transitively, in the sense that given any
pair of points α and β in the disc, there is an automorphism ψ mapping
α to β. One such ψ is given by ψ = ψβ ◦ψα.
The explicit formulas for the automorphisms of D give a good de-
scription of the group Aut(D). In fact, this group of automorphisms is
“almost” isomorphic to a group of 2 × 2 matrices with complex entries
often denoted by SU(1, 1). This group consists of all 2 × 2 matrices that
preserve the hermitian form on C2 × C2 deﬁned by
⟨Z, W⟩= z1w1 −z2w2,
where Z = (z1, z2) and W = (w1, w2). For more information about this
subject, we refer the reader to Problem 4.
2.2 Automorphisms of the upper half-plane
Our knowledge of the automorphisms of D together with the conformal
map F : H →D found in Section 1.1 allow us to determine the group of
automorphisms of H which we denote by Aut(H).
Consider the map
Γ : Aut(D) →Aut(H)
given by “conjugation by F”:
Γ(ϕ) = F −1 ◦ϕ ◦F.
It is clear that Γ(ϕ) is an automorphism of H whenever ϕ is an auto-
morphism of D, and Γ is a bijection whose inverse is given by Γ−1(ψ) =
F ◦ψ ◦F −1. In fact, we prove more, namely that Γ preserves the oper-
ations on the corresponding groups of automorphisms. Indeed, suppose
that ϕ1, ϕ2 ∈Aut(D). Since F ◦F −1 is the identity on D we ﬁnd that
Γ(ϕ1 ◦ϕ2) = F −1 ◦ϕ1 ◦ϕ2 ◦F
= F −1 ◦ϕ1 ◦F ◦F −1 ◦ϕ2 ◦F
= Γ(ϕ1) ◦Γ(ϕ2).
The conclusion is that the two groups Aut(D) and Aut(H) are the same,
since Γ deﬁnes an isomorphism between them. We are still left with the

222
Chapter 8. CONFORMAL MAPPINGS
task of giving a description of elements of Aut(H). A series of calcula-
tions, which consist of pulling back the automorphisms of the disc to the
upper half-plane via F, can be used to verify that Aut(H) consists of all
maps
z 	→az + b
cz + d,
where a, b, c, and d are real numbers with ad −bc = 1. Again, a matrix
group is lurking in the background. Let SL2(R) denote the group of all
2 × 2 matrices with real entries and determinant 1, namely
SL2(R) =

M =

a
b
c
d

:
a, b, c, d ∈R and det(M) = ad −bc=1
"
.
This group is called the special linear group.
Given a matrix M ∈SL2(R) we deﬁne the mapping fM by
fM(z) = az + b
cz + d.
Theorem 2.4 Every automorphism of H takes the form fM for some
M ∈SL2(R). Conversely, every map of this form is an automorphism of
H.
The proof consists of a sequence of steps. For brevity, we denote the
group SL2(R) by G.
Step 1. If M ∈G, then fM maps H to itself. This is clear from the
observation that
(4)
Im(fM(z)) = (ad −bc)Im(z)
|cz + d|2
=
Im(z)
|cz + d|2 > 0
whenever z ∈H.
Step 2. If M and M ′ are two matrices in G, then fM ◦fM ′ = fMM ′.
This follows from a straightforward calculation, which we omit. As a
consequence, we can prove the ﬁrst half of the theorem. Each fM is an
automorphism because it has a holomorphic inverse (fM)−1, which is
simply fM −1. Indeed, if I is the identity matrix, then
(fM ◦fM −1)(z) = fMM −1(z) = fI(z) = z.
Step 3. Given any two points z and w in H, there exists M ∈G such
that fM(z) = w, and therefore G acts transitively on H. To prove this,

2. The Schwarz lemma; automorphisms of the disc and upper half-plane
223
it suﬃces to show that we can map any z ∈H to i. Setting d = 0 in
equation (4) above gives
Im(fM(z)) = Im(z)
|cz|2
and we may choose a real number c so that Im(fM(z)) = 1. Next we
choose the matrix
M1 =

0
−c−1
c
0

so that fM1(z) has imaginary part equal to 1. Then we translate by a
matrix of the form
M2 =

1
b
0
1

with b ∈R,
to bring fM1(z) to i. Finally, the map fM with M = M2M1 takes z to i.
Step 4. If θ is real, then the matrix
Mθ =

cos θ
−sin θ
sin θ
cos θ

belongs to G, and if F : H →D denotes the standard conformal map, then
F ◦fMθ ◦F −1 corresponds to the rotation of angle −2θ in the disc. This
follows from the fact that F ◦fMθ = e−2iθF(z), which is easily veriﬁed.
Step 5. We can now complete the proof of the theorem. We suppose
f is an automorphism of H with f(β) = i, and consider a matrix N ∈G
such that fN(i) = β. Then g = f ◦fN satisﬁes g(i) = i, and therefore
F ◦g ◦F −1 is an automorphism of the disc that ﬁxes the origin.
So
F ◦g ◦F −1 is a rotation, and by Step 4 there exists θ ∈R such that
F ◦g ◦F −1 = F ◦fMθ ◦F −1.
Hence g = fMθ, and we conclude that f = fMθN −1 which is of the desired
form.
A ﬁnal observation is that the group Aut(H) is not quite isomorphic
with SL2(R). The reason for this is because the two matrices M and −M
give rise to the same function fM = f−M. Therefore, if we identify the
two matrices M and −M, then we obtain a new group PSL2(R) called
the projective special linear group; this group is isomorphic with
Aut(H).

224
Chapter 8. CONFORMAL MAPPINGS
3 The Riemann mapping theorem
3.1 Necessary conditions and statement of the theorem
We now come to the promised cornerstone of this chapter. The basic
problem is to determine conditions on an open set Ωthat guarantee the
existence of a conformal map F : Ω→D.
A series of simple observations allow us to ﬁnd necessary conditions
on Ω. First, if Ω= C there can be no conformal map F : Ω→D, since
by Liouville’s theorem F would have to be a constant.
Therefore, a
necessary condition is to assume that Ω̸ = C. Since D is connected, we
must also impose the requirement that Ωbe connected. There is still
one more condition that is forced upon us: since D is simply connected,
the same must be true of Ω(see Exercise 3).
It is remarkable that
these conditions on Ωare also suﬃcient to guarantee the existence of a
biholomorpism from Ωto D.
For brevity, we shall call a subset Ωof C proper if it is non-empty
and not the whole of C.
Theorem 3.1 (Riemann mapping theorem) Suppose Ωis proper and
simply connected. If z0 ∈Ω, then there exists a unique conformal map
F : Ω→D such that
F(z0) = 0
and
F ′(z0) > 0.
Corollary 3.2 Any two proper simply connected open subsets in C are
conformally equivalent.
Clearly, the corollary follows from the theorem, since we can use as
an intermediate step the unit disc. Also, the uniqueness statement in
the theorem is straightforward, since if F and G are conformal maps
from Ωto D that satisfy these two conditions, then H = F ◦G−1 is an
automorphism of the disc that ﬁxes the origin. Therefore H(z) = eiθz,
and since H′(0) > 0, we must have eiθ = 1, from which we conclude that
F = G.
The rest of this section is devoted to the proof of the existence of the
conformal map F. The idea of the proof is as follows. We consider all
injective holomorphic maps f : Ω→D with f(z0) = 0. From these we
wish to choose an f so that its image ﬁlls out all of D, and this can be
achieved by making f ′(z0) as large as possible. In doing this, we shall
need to be able to extract f as a limit from a given sequence of functions.
We turn to this point ﬁrst.
