[문서 맥락]
책: Complex Analysis / 저자: Elias M. Stein & Rami Shakarchi
챕터: 8. Conformal Mappings
현재 소단원: 8.3.1 Necessary conditions and statement of the theorem
직전 소단원: 「8.2.2 Automorphisms of the upper half-plane」
[본문]
224
Chapter 8. CONFORMAL MAPPINGS
3 The Riemann mapping theorem
3.1 Necessary conditions and statement of the theorem
We now come to the promised cornerstone of this chapter. The basic
problem is to determine conditions on an open set Ωthat guarantee the
existence of a conformal map F : Ω→D.
A series of simple observations allow us to ﬁnd necessary conditions
on Ω. First, if Ω= C there can be no conformal map F : Ω→D, since
by Liouville’s theorem F would have to be a constant.
Therefore, a
necessary condition is to assume that Ω̸ = C. Since D is connected, we
must also impose the requirement that Ωbe connected. There is still
one more condition that is forced upon us: since D is simply connected,
the same must be true of Ω(see Exercise 3).
It is remarkable that
these conditions on Ωare also suﬃcient to guarantee the existence of a
biholomorpism from Ωto D.
For brevity, we shall call a subset Ωof C proper if it is non-empty
and not the whole of C.
Theorem 3.1 (Riemann mapping theorem) Suppose Ωis proper and
simply connected. If z0 ∈Ω, then there exists a unique conformal map
F : Ω→D such that
F(z0) = 0
and
F ′(z0) > 0.
Corollary 3.2 Any two proper simply connected open subsets in C are
conformally equivalent.
Clearly, the corollary follows from the theorem, since we can use as
an intermediate step the unit disc. Also, the uniqueness statement in
the theorem is straightforward, since if F and G are conformal maps
from Ωto D that satisfy these two conditions, then H = F ◦G−1 is an
automorphism of the disc that ﬁxes the origin. Therefore H(z) = eiθz,
and since H′(0) > 0, we must have eiθ = 1, from which we conclude that
F = G.
The rest of this section is devoted to the proof of the existence of the
conformal map F. The idea of the proof is as follows. We consider all
injective holomorphic maps f : Ω→D with f(z0) = 0. From these we
wish to choose an f so that its image ﬁlls out all of D, and this can be
achieved by making f ′(z0) as large as possible. In doing this, we shall
need to be able to extract f as a limit from a given sequence of functions.
We turn to this point ﬁrst.

3. The Riemann mapping theorem
225
3.2 Montel’s theorem
Let Ωbe an open subset of C. A family F of holomorphic functions on
Ωis said to be normal if every sequence in F has a subsequence that
converges uniformly on every compact subset of Ω(the limit need not be
in F).
The proof that a family of functions is normal is, in practice, the con-
sequence of two related properties, uniform boundedness and equiconti-
nuity. These we shall now deﬁne.
The family F is said to be uniformly bounded on compact subsets
of Ωif for each compact set K ⊂Ωthere exists B > 0, such that
|f(z)| ≤B
for all z ∈K and f ∈F.
Also, the family F is equicontinuous on a compact set K if for every
ϵ > 0 there exists δ > 0 such that whenever z, w ∈K and |z −w| < δ,
then
|f(z) −f(w)| < ϵ
for all f ∈F.
Equicontinuity is a strong condition, which requires uniform continuity,
uniformly in the family. For instance, any family of diﬀerentiable func-
tions on [0, 1] whose derivatives are uniformly bounded is equicontinuous.
This follows directly from the mean value theorem. On the other hand,
note that the family {fn} on [0, 1] given by fn(x) = xn is not equicon-
tinuous since for any ﬁxed 0 < x0 < 1 we have |fn(1) −fn(x0)| →1 as n
tends to inﬁnity.
The theorem that follows puts together these new concepts and is an
important ingredient in the proof of the Riemann mapping theorem.
Theorem 3.3 Suppose F is a family of holomorphic functions on Ωthat
is uniformly bounded on compact subsets of Ω. Then:
(i)
F is equicontinuous on every compact subset of Ω.
(ii)
F is a normal family.
The theorem really consists of two separate parts. The ﬁrst part says
that F is equicontinuous under the assumption that F is a family of
holomorphic functions that is uniformly bounded on compact subsets of
Ω. The proof follows from an application of the Cauchy integral formula
and hence relies on the fact that F consists of holomorphic functions.
This conclusion is in sharp contrast with the real situation as illustrated
by the family of functions given by fn(x) = sin(nx) on (0, 1), which is
