[문서 맥락]
책: Complex Analysis / 저자: Elias M. Stein & Rami Shakarchi
챕터: 9. An Introduction to Elliptic Functions
현재 소단원: 9.1.1 Liouville’s theorems
직전 소단원: 「8.6 Problems」
[본문]
9 An Introduction to Elliptic
Functions
The form that Jacobi had given to the theory of elliptic
functions was far from perfection; its ﬂaws are obvious.
At the base we ﬁnd three fundamental functions sn,
cn and dn.
These functions do not have the same
periods...
In Weierstrass’ system, instead of three funda-
mental functions, there is only one, ℘(u), and it is the
simplest of all having the same periods. It has only
one double inﬁnity; and ﬁnally its deﬁnition is so that
it does not change when one replaces one system of
periods by another equivalent system.
H. Poincar´e, 1899
The theory of elliptic functions, which is of interest in several parts of
mathematics, initially grew out of the study of elliptic integrals. These
can be described generally as integrals of the form

R(x,
	
P(x)) dx,
where R is a rational function and P a polynomial of degree three or
four.1 These integrals arose in computing the arc-length of an ellipse, or
of a lemniscate, and in a variety of other problems. Their early study was
centered on their special transformation properties and on the discovery
of an inherent double-periodicity. We have seen an example of this latter
phenomenon in the mapping function of the half-plane to a rectangle
taken up in Section 4.5 of the previous chapter.
It was Jacobi who transformed the subject by initiating the systematic
study of doubly-periodic functions (called elliptic functions). In this the-
ory, the theta functions he introduced played a decisive role. Weierstrass
after him developed another approach, which in its initial steps is simpler
and more elegant. It is based on his ℘function, and in this chapter we
shall sketch the beginnings of that theory. We will go as far as to glimpse
a possible connection with number theory, by considering the Eisenstein
series and their expression involving divisor functions. A number of more
direct links with combinatorics and number theory arise from the theta
1The case when P is a quadratic polynomial is essentially that of “circular functions”,
and can be reduced to the trigonometric functions sin x, cos x, etc.

262
Chapter 9. AN INTRODUCTION TO ELLIPTIC FUNCTIONS
functions, which we will take up in the next chapter. The remarkable
facts we shall see there attest to the great interest of these functions in
mathematics. As such they ought to soften the harsh opinion expressed
above about the imperfection of Jacobi’s theory.
1 Elliptic functions
We are interested in meromorphic functions f on C that have two periods;
that is, there are two non-zero complex numbers ω1 and ω2 such that
f(z + ω1) = f(z)
and
f(z + ω2) = f(z),
for all z ∈C. A function with two periods is said to be doubly periodic.
The case when ω1 and ω2 are linearly dependent over R, that is
ω2/ω1 ∈R, is uninteresting. Indeed, Exercise 1 shows that in this case f
is either periodic with a simple period (if the quotient ω2/ω1 is rational)
or f is constant (if ω2/ω1 is irrational). Therefore, we make the following
assumption: the periods ω1 and ω2 are linearly independent over R.
We now describe a normalization that we shall use extensively in this
chapter. Let τ = ω2/ω1. Since τ and 1/τ have imaginary parts of oppo-
site signs, and since τ is not real, we may assume (after possibly inter-
changing the roles of ω1 and ω2) that Im(τ) > 0. Observe now that the
function f has periods ω1 and ω2 if and only if the function F(z) = f(ω1z)
has periods 1 and τ, and moreover, the function f is meromorphic if and
only if F is meromorphic.
Also the properties of f are immediately
deducible from those of F. We may therefore assume, without loss of
generality, that f is a meromorphic function on C with periods 1 and τ
where Im(τ) > 0.
Successive applications of the periodicity conditions yield
(1)
f(z + n + mτ) = f(z)
for all integers n, m and all z ∈C,
and it is therefore natural to consider the lattice in C deﬁned by
Λ = {n + mτ : n, m ∈Z}.
We say that 1 and τ generate Λ (see Figure 1).
Equation (1) says that f is constant under translations by elements
of Λ. Associated to the lattice Λ is the fundamental parallelogram
deﬁned by
P0 = {z ∈C : z = a + bτ where 0 ≤a < 1 and 0 ≤b < 1}.

1. Elliptic functions
263
0
τ
1
Figure 1. The lattice Λ generated by 1 and τ
The importance of the fundamental parallelogram comes from the fact
that f is completely determined by its behavior on P0. To see this, we
need a deﬁnition: two complex numbers z and w are congruent modulo
Λ if
z = w + n + mτ
for some n, m ∈Z,
and we write z ∼w. In other words, z and w diﬀer by a point in the
lattice, z −w ∈Λ. By (1) we conclude that f(z) = f(w) whenever z ∼w.
If we can show that any point in z ∈C is congruent to a unique point in
P0 then we will have proved that f is completely determined by its values
in the fundamental parallelogram. Suppose z = x + iy is given, and write
z = a + bτ where a, b ∈R. This is possible since 1 and τ form a basis over
the reals of the two-dimensional vector space C. Then choose n and m to
be the greatest integers ≤a and ≤b, respectively. If we let w = z −n −
mτ, then by deﬁnition z ∼w, and moreover w = (a −n) + (b −m)τ. By
construction, it is clear that w ∈P0. To prove uniqueness, suppose that
w and w′ are two points in P0 that are congruent. If we write w = a + bτ
and w′ = a′ + b′τ, then w −w′ = (a −a′) + (b −b′)τ ∈Λ, and therefore
both a −a′ and b −b′ are integers.
But since 0 ≤a, a′ < 1, we have
−1 < a −a′ < 1, which then implies a −a′ = 0. Similarly b −b′ = 0, and
we conclude that w = w′.
More generally, a period parallelogram P is any translate of the
fundamental parallelogram, P = P0 + h with h ∈C (see Figure 2).
Since we can apply the lemma to z −h, we conclude that every point
in C is congruent to a unique point in a given period parallelogram.
Therefore, f is uniquely determined by its behavior on any period par-
allelogram.

264
Chapter 9. AN INTRODUCTION TO ELLIPTIC FUNCTIONS
h + 1
h + τ
P0 + h
h
Figure 2. A period parallelogram
Finally, note that Λ and P0 give rise to a covering (or tiling) of the
complex plane
(2)
C =

n,m∈Z
(n + mτ + P0),
and moreover, this union is disjoint. This is immediate from the facts
we just collected and the deﬁnition of P0. We summarize what we have
seen so far.
Proposition 1.1 Suppose f is a meromorphic function with two periods
1 and τ which generate the lattice Λ. Then:
(i) Every point in C is congruent to a unique point in the fundamental
parallelogram.
(ii) Every point in C is congruent to a unique point in any given period
parallelogram.
(iii) The lattice Λ provides a disjoint covering of the complex plane, in
the sense of (2).
(iv) The function f is completely determined by its values in any period
parallelogram.
1.1 Liouville’s theorems
We can now see why we assumed from the beginning that f is meromor-
phic rather than just holomorphic.
Theorem 1.2 An entire doubly periodic function is constant.
Proof.
The function is completely determined by its values on P0
and since the closure of P0 is compact, we conclude that the function is
bounded on C, hence constant by Liouville’s theorem in Chapter 2.

1. Elliptic functions
265
A non-constant doubly periodic meromorphic function is called an el-
liptic function. Since a meromorphic function can have only ﬁnitely
many zeros and poles in any large disc, we see that an elliptic function
will have only ﬁnitely many zeros and poles in any given period parallel-
ogram, and in particular, this is true in the fundamental parallelogram.
Of course, nothing excludes f from having a pole or zero on the boundary
of P0.
As usual, we count poles and zeros with multiplicities. Keeping this
in mind we can prove the following theorem.
Theorem 1.3 The total number of poles of an elliptic function in P0 is
always ≥2.
In other words, f cannot have only one simple pole. It must have at
least two poles, and this does not exclude the case of a single pole of
multiplicity ≥2.
Proof.
Suppose ﬁrst that f has no poles on the boundary ∂P0 of the
fundamental parallelogram. By the residue theorem we have

∂P0
f(z) dz = 2πi

resf,
and we contend that the integral is 0. To see this, we simply use the
periodicity of f. Note that

∂P0
f(z) dz =
 1
0
f(z) dz +
 1+τ
1
f(z) dz +
 τ
1+τ
f(z) dz +
 0
τ
f(z) dz,
and the integrals over opposite sides cancel out. For instance
 1
0
f(z) dz +
 τ
1+τ
f(z) dz =
 1
0
f(z) dz +
 0
1
f(s + τ) ds
=
 1
0
f(z) dz +
 0
1
f(s) ds
=
 1
0
f(z) dz −
 1
0
f(z) dz
= 0,
and similarly for the other pair of sides. Hence

∂P0 f = 0 and  resf =
0. Therefore f must have at least two poles in P0.
If f has a pole on ∂P0 choose a small h ∈C so that if P = h + P0,
then f has no poles on ∂P. Arguing as before, we ﬁnd that f must have
at least two poles in P, and therefore the same conclusion holds for P0.

266
Chapter 9. AN INTRODUCTION TO ELLIPTIC FUNCTIONS
The total number of poles (counted according to their multiplicities)
of an elliptic function is called its order. The next theorem says that
elliptic functions have as many zeros as they have poles, if the zeros are
counted with their multiplicities.
Theorem 1.4 Every elliptic function of order m has m zeros in P0.
Proof.
Assuming ﬁrst that f has no zeros or poles on the boundary
of P0, we know by the argument principle in Chapter 3 that

∂P0
f ′(z)
f(z) dz = 2πi(Nz −Np)
where Nz and Np denote the number of zeros and poles of f in P0,
respectively. By periodicity, we can argue as in the proof of the previous
theorem to ﬁnd that 
∂P0 f ′/f = 0, and therefore Nz = Np.
In the case when a pole or zero of f lies on ∂P0 it suﬃces to apply the
argument to a translate of P.
As a consequence, if f is elliptic then the equation f(z) = c has as
many solutions as the order of f for every c ∈C, simply because f −c
is elliptic and has as many poles as f.
Despite the rather simple nature of the theorems above, there remains
the question of showing that elliptic functions exist. We now turn to a
constructive solution of this problem.
1.2 The Weierstrass ℘function
An elliptic function of order two
This section is devoted to the basic example of an elliptic function. As
we have seen above, any elliptic function must have at least two poles;
we shall in fact construct one whose only singularity will be a double
pole at the points of the lattice generated by the periods.
Before looking at the case of doubly-periodic functions, let us ﬁrst
consider brieﬂy functions with only a single period.
If one wished to
construct a function with period 1 and poles at all the integers, a simple
choice would be the sum
F(z) =
∞

n=−∞
1
z + n.
Note that the sum remains unchanged if we replace z by z + 1, and the
poles are at the integers. However, the series deﬁning F is not absolutely
