[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 0. Some Underlying Geometric Notions
현재 소단원: 0.1 Homotopy and Homotopy Type
[본문]
The aim of this short preliminary chapter is to introduce a few of the most com-
mon geometric concepts and constructions in algebraic topology. The exposition is
somewhat informal, with no theorems or proofs until the last couple pages, and it
should be read in this informal spirit, skipping bits here and there. In fact, this whole
chapter could be skipped now, to be referred back to later for basic deﬁnitions.
To avoid overusing the word ‘continuous’ we adopt the convention that maps be-
tween spaces are always assumed to be continuous unless otherwise stated.
Homotopy and Homotopy Type
One of the main ideas of algebraic topology is to consider two spaces to be equiv-
alent if they have ‘the same shape’ in a sense that is much broader than homeo-
morphism.
To take an everyday example, the letters of the alphabet can be writ-
ten either as unions of ﬁnitely many
straight and curved line segments, or
in thickened forms that are compact
subsurfaces of the plane bounded by
simple closed curves. In each case the
thin letter is a subspace of the thick
letter, and we can continuously shrink the thick letter to the thin one. A nice way to
do this is to decompose a thick letter, call it X, into line segments connecting each
point on the outer boundary of X to a unique point of the thin subletter X, as indi-
cated in the ﬁgure. Then we can shrink X to X by sliding each point of X −X into X
along the line segment that contains it. Points that are already in X do not move.
We can think of this shrinking process as taking place during a time interval
0 ≤t ≤1, and then it deﬁnes a family of functions ft : X→X parametrized by t ∈I =
[0, 1], where ft(x) is the point to which a given point x ∈X has moved at time t .

2
Chapter 0
Some Underlying Geometric Notions
Naturally we would like ft(x) to depend continuously on both t and x , and this will
be true if we have each x ∈X −X move along its line segment at constant speed so
as to reach its image point in X at time t = 1, while points x ∈X are stationary, as
remarked earlier.
Examples of this sort lead to the following general deﬁnition. A deformation
retraction of a space X onto a subspace A is a family of maps ft : X→X , t ∈I , such
that f0 = 11 (the identity map), f1(X) = A, and ft ||A = 11 for all t . The family ft
should be continuous in the sense that the associated map X×I→X , (x, t), ft(x),
is continuous.
It is easy to produce many more examples similar to the letter examples, with the
deformation retraction ft obtained by sliding along line segments. The ﬁgure on the
left below shows such a deformation retraction of a M¨obius band onto its core circle.
The three ﬁgures on the right show deformation retractions in which a disk with two
smaller open subdisks removed shrinks to three different subspaces.
In all these examples the structure that gives rise to the deformation retraction can
be described by means of the following deﬁnition. For a map f : X→Y , the mapping
cylinder Mf is the quotient space of the disjoint union (X×I) ⨿Y obtained by iden-
tifying each (x, 1) ∈X×I
with f (x) ∈Y . In the let-
X × I
X
Y
Y
Mf
f X
(
)
ter examples, the space X
is the outer boundary of the
thick letter, Y is the thin
letter, and f : X→Y sends
the outer endpoint of each line segment to its inner endpoint. A similar description
applies to the other examples. Then it is a general fact that a mapping cylinder Mf
deformation retracts to the subspace Y by sliding each point (x, t) along the segment
{x}×I ⊂Mf to the endpoint f (x) ∈Y .
Not all deformation retractions arise in this way from mapping cylinders, how-
ever.
For example, the thick X deformation retracts to the thin X, which in turn
deformation retracts to the point of intersection of its two crossbars. The net result
is a deformation retraction of X onto a point, during which certain pairs of points
follow paths that merge before reaching their ﬁnal destination. Later in this section
we will describe a considerably more complicated example, the so-called ‘house with
two rooms,’ where a deformation retraction to a point can be constructed abstractly,
but seeing the deformation with the naked eye is a real challenge.

Homotopy and Homotopy Type
Chapter 0
3
A deformation retraction ft : X→X is a special case of the general notion of a
homotopy, which is simply any family of maps ft : X→Y , t ∈I , such that the asso-
ciated map F : X×I→Y given by F(x, t) = ft(x) is continuous. One says that two
maps f0, f1 : X→Y are homotopic if there exists a homotopy ft connecting them,
and one writes f0 ≃f1 .
In these terms, a deformation retraction of X onto a subspace A is a homotopy
from the identity map of X to a retraction of X onto A, a map r : X→X such that
r(X) = A and r ||A = 11. One could equally well regard a retraction as a map X→A
restricting to the identity on the subspace A ⊂X . From a more formal viewpoint a
retraction is a map r : X→X with r 2 = r , since this equation says exactly that r is the
identity on its image. Retractions are the topological analogs of projection operators
in other parts of mathematics.
Not all retractions come from deformation retractions. For example, a space X
always retracts onto any point x0 ∈X via the constant map sending all of X to x0 ,
but a space that deformation retracts onto a point must be path-connected since a
deformation retraction of X to x0 gives a path joining each x ∈X to x0 . It is less
trivial to show that there are path-connected spaces that do not deformation retract
onto a point. One would expect this to be the case for the letters ‘with holes,’ A, B,
D, O, P, Q, R. In Chapter 1 we will develop techniques to prove this.
A homotopy ft : X→X that gives a deformation retraction of X onto a subspace
A has the property that ft ||A = 11 for all t . In general, a homotopy ft : X→Y whose
restriction to a subspace A ⊂X is independent of t is called a homotopy relative
to A, or more concisely, a homotopy rel A. Thus, a deformation retraction of X onto
A is a homotopy rel A from the identity map of X to a retraction of X onto A.
If a space X deformation retracts onto a subspace A via ft : X→X , then if
r : X→A denotes the resulting retraction and i : A→X the inclusion, we have ri = 11
and ir ≃11, the latter homotopy being given by ft . Generalizing this situation, a
map f : X→Y is called a homotopy equivalence if there is a map g : Y→X such that
fg ≃11 and gf ≃11. The spaces X and Y are said to be homotopy equivalent or to
have the same homotopy type. The notation is X ≃Y . It is an easy exercise to check
that this is an equivalence relation, in contrast with the nonsymmetric notion of de-
formation retraction. For example, the three graphs
are all homotopy
equivalent since they are deformation retracts of the same space, as we saw earlier,
but none of the three is a deformation retract of any other.
It is true in general that two spaces X and Y are homotopy equivalent if and only
if there exists a third space Z containing both X and Y as deformation retracts. For
the less trivial implication one can in fact take Z to be the mapping cylinder Mf of
any homotopy equivalence f : X→Y . We observed previously that Mf deformation
retracts to Y , so what needs to be proved is that Mf also deformation retracts to its
other end X if f is a homotopy equivalence. This is shown in Corollary 0.21.

4
Chapter 0
Some Underlying Geometric Notions
A space having the homotopy type of a point is called contractible. This amounts
to requiring that the identity map of the space be nullhomotopic, that is, homotopic
to a constant map. In general, this is slightly weaker than saying the space deforma-
tion retracts to a point; see the exercises at the end of the chapter for an example
distinguishing these two notions.
Let us describe now an example of a 2 dimensional subspace of R3 , known as the
house with two rooms, which is contractible but not in any obvious way. To build this
=
∪
∪
space, start with a box divided into two chambers by a horizontal rectangle, where by a
‘rectangle’ we mean not just the four edges of a rectangle but also its interior. Access to
the two chambers from outside the box is provided by two vertical tunnels. The upper
tunnel is made by punching out a square from the top of the box and another square
directly below it from the middle horizontal rectangle, then inserting four vertical
rectangles, the walls of the tunnel. This tunnel allows entry to the lower chamber
from outside the box. The lower tunnel is formed in similar fashion, providing entry
to the upper chamber. Finally, two vertical rectangles are inserted to form ‘support
walls’ for the two tunnels. The resulting space X thus consists of three horizontal
pieces homeomorphic to annuli plus all the vertical rectangles that form the walls of
the two chambers.
To see that X is contractible, consider a closed ε neighborhood N(X) of X .
This clearly deformation retracts onto X if ε is sufﬁciently small.
In fact, N(X)
is the mapping cylinder of a map from the boundary surface of N(X) to X . Less
obvious is the fact that N(X) is homeomorphic to D3 , the unit ball in R3 . To see
this, imagine forming N(X) from a ball of clay by pushing a ﬁnger into the ball to
create the upper tunnel, then gradually hollowing out the lower chamber, and similarly
pushing a ﬁnger in to create the lower tunnel and hollowing out the upper chamber.
Mathematically, this process gives a family of embeddings ht : D3→R3 starting with
the usual inclusion D3 > R3 and ending with a homeomorphism onto N(X).
Thus we have X ≃N(X) = D3 ≃point , so X is contractible since homotopy
equivalence is an equivalence relation. In fact, X deformation retracts to a point. For
if ft is a deformation retraction of the ball N(X) to a point x0 ∈X and if r : N(X)→X
is a retraction, for example the end result of a deformation retraction of N(X) to X ,
then the restriction of the composition rft to X is a deformation retraction of X to
x0 . However, it is quite a challenging exercise to see exactly what this deformation
retraction looks like.

Cell Complexes
Chapter 0
5
Cell Complexes
A familiar way of constructing the torus S1×S1 is by identifying opposite sides
of a square. More generally, an orientable surface Mg of genus g can be constructed
from a polygon with 4g sides
by identifying pairs of edges,
as shown in the ﬁgure in the
ﬁrst three cases g = 1, 2, 3.
The 4g edges of the polygon
a
b
a
a
b
b
b
b
b
b
c
a
a
a
d
a
c
c
c
c
b
d
d
d
d
e
e
f
f
a
e
f
d
c
b
a
become a union of 2g circles
in the surface, all intersect-
ing in a single point. The in-
terior of the polygon can be
thought of as an open disk,
or a 2 cell, attached to the
union of the 2g circles. One
can also regard the union of
the circles as being obtained
from their common point of
intersection, by attaching 2g
open arcs, or 1 cells.
Thus
the surface can be built up in stages: Start with a point, attach 1 cells to this point,
then attach a 2 cell.
A natural generalization of this is to construct a space by the following procedure:
(1) Start with a discrete set X0 , whose points are regarded as 0 cells.
(2) Inductively, form the n skeleton Xn from Xn−1 by attaching n cells en
α via maps
ϕα : Sn−1→Xn−1 . This means that Xn is the quotient space of the disjoint union
Xn−1`
α Dn
α of Xn−1 with a collection of n disks Dn
α under the identiﬁcations
x ∼ϕα(x) for x ∈∂Dn
α . Thus as a set, Xn = Xn−1`
α en
α where each en
α is an
open n disk.
(3) One can either stop this inductive process at a ﬁnite stage, setting X = Xn for
some n < ∞, or one can continue indeﬁnitely, setting X =
S
n Xn . In the latter
case X is given the weak topology: A set A ⊂X is open (or closed) iff A ∩Xn is
open (or closed) in Xn for each n.
A space X constructed in this way is called a cell complex or CW complex.
The
explanation of the letters ‘CW’ is given in the Appendix, where a number of basic
topological properties of cell complexes are proved. The reader who wonders about
various point-set topological questions lurking in the background of the following
discussion should consult the Appendix for details.
