[л¬ём„ң л§ҘлқҪ]
мұ…: Algebraic Topology / м Җмһҗ: Allen Hatcher
мұ•н„°: 0. Some Underlying Geometric Notions
нҳ„мһ¬ мҶҢлӢЁмӣҗ: 0.2 Cell Complexes
м§Ғм „ мҶҢлӢЁмӣҗ: гҖҢ0.1 Homotopy and Homotopy TypeгҖҚ
[ліёл¬ё]
Cell Complexes
Chapter 0
5
Cell Complexes
A familiar way of constructing the torus S1Г—S1 is by identifying opposite sides
of a square. More generally, an orientable surface Mg of genus g can be constructed
from a polygon with 4g sides
by identifying pairs of edges,
as shown in the п¬Ғgure in the
п¬Ғrst three cases g = 1, 2, 3.
The 4g edges of the polygon
a
b
a
a
b
b
b
b
b
b
c
a
a
a
d
a
c
c
c
c
b
d
d
d
d
e
e
f
f
a
e
f
d
c
b
a
become a union of 2g circles
in the surface, all intersect-
ing in a single point. The in-
terior of the polygon can be
thought of as an open disk,
or a 2 cell, attached to the
union of the 2g circles. One
can also regard the union of
the circles as being obtained
from their common point of
intersection, by attaching 2g
open arcs, or 1 cells.
Thus
the surface can be built up in stages: Start with a point, attach 1 cells to this point,
then attach a 2 cell.
A natural generalization of this is to construct a space by the following procedure:
(1) Start with a discrete set X0 , whose points are regarded as 0 cells.
(2) Inductively, form the n skeleton Xn from XnвҲ’1 by attaching n cells en
Оұ via maps
П•Оұ : SnвҲ’1вҶ’XnвҲ’1 . This means that Xn is the quotient space of the disjoint union
XnвҲ’1`
Оұ Dn
Оұ of XnвҲ’1 with a collection of n disks Dn
Оұ under the identiп¬Ғcations
x вҲјП•Оұ(x) for x вҲҲвҲӮDn
Оұ . Thus as a set, Xn = XnвҲ’1`
Оұ en
Оұ where each en
Оұ is an
open n disk.
(3) One can either stop this inductive process at a п¬Ғnite stage, setting X = Xn for
some n < вҲһ, or one can continue indeп¬Ғnitely, setting X =
S
n Xn . In the latter
case X is given the weak topology: A set A вҠӮX is open (or closed) iff A вҲ©Xn is
open (or closed) in Xn for each n.
A space X constructed in this way is called a cell complex or CW complex.
The
explanation of the letters вҖҳCWвҖҷ is given in the Appendix, where a number of basic
topological properties of cell complexes are proved. The reader who wonders about
various point-set topological questions lurking in the background of the following
discussion should consult the Appendix for details.

6
Chapter 0
Some Underlying Geometric Notions
If X = Xn for some n, then X is said to be п¬Ғnite-dimensional, and the smallest
such n is the dimension of X , the maximum dimension of cells of X .
Example 0.1. A 1 dimensional cell complex X = X1 is what is called a graph in
algebraic topology. It consists of vertices (the 0 cells) to which edges (the 1 cells) are
attached. The two ends of an edge can be attached to the same vertex.
Example 0.2.
The house with two rooms, pictured earlier, has a visually obvious
2 dimensional cell complex structure. The 0 cells are the vertices where three or more
of the depicted edges meet, and the 1 cells are the interiors of the edges connecting
these vertices. This gives the 1 skeleton X1 , and the 2 cells are the components of
the remainder of the space, X вҲ’X1 . If one counts up, one п¬Ғnds there are 29 0 cells,
51 1 cells, and 23 2 cells, with the alternating sum 29 вҲ’51 + 23 equal to 1. This is
the Euler characteristic, which for a cell complex with п¬Ғnitely many cells is deп¬Ғned
to be the number of even-dimensional cells minus the number of odd-dimensional
cells. As we shall show in Theorem 2.44, the Euler characteristic of a cell complex
depends only on its homotopy type, so the fact that the house with two rooms has the
homotopy type of a point implies that its Euler characteristic must be 1, no matter
how it is represented as a cell complex.
Example 0.3. The sphere Sn has the structure of a cell complex with just two cells, e0
and en , the n cell being attached by the constant map SnвҲ’1вҶ’e0 . This is equivalent
to regarding Sn as the quotient space Dn/вҲӮDn .
Example 0.4. Real projective n space RPn is deп¬Ғned to be the space of all lines
through the origin in Rn+1 . Each such line is determined by a nonzero vector in Rn+1 ,
unique up to scalar multiplication, and RPn is topologized as the quotient space of
Rn+1 вҲ’{0} under the equivalence relation v вҲјО»v for scalars О» вү 0. We can restrict
to vectors of length 1, so RPn is also the quotient space Sn/(v вҲјвҲ’v), the sphere
with antipodal points identiп¬Ғed. This is equivalent to saying that RPn is the quotient
space of a hemisphere Dn with antipodal points of вҲӮDn identiп¬Ғed. Since вҲӮDn with
antipodal points identiп¬Ғed is just RPnвҲ’1 , we see that RPn is obtained from RPnвҲ’1 by
attaching an n cell, with the quotient projection SnвҲ’1вҶ’RPnвҲ’1 as the attaching map.
It follows by induction on n that RPn has a cell complex structure e0 вҲӘe1 вҲӘВ·В·В· вҲӘen
with one cell ei in each dimension i вүӨn.
Example 0.5. Since RPn is obtained from RPnвҲ’1 by attaching an n cell, the inп¬Ғnite
union RPвҲһ=
S
n RPn becomes a cell complex with one cell in each dimension. We
can view RPвҲһas the space of lines through the origin in RвҲһ=
S
n Rn .
Example 0.6. Complex projective n space CPn is the space of complex lines through
the origin in Cn+1 , that is, 1 dimensional vector subspaces of Cn+1 . As in the case
of RPn , each line is determined by a nonzero vector in Cn+1 , unique up to scalar
multiplication, and CPn is topologized as the quotient space of Cn+1 вҲ’{0} under the

Cell Complexes
Chapter 0
7
equivalence relation v вҲјО»v for О» вү 0. Equivalently, this is the quotient of the unit
sphere S2n+1 вҠӮCn+1 with v вҲјО»v for |О»| = 1. It is also possible to obtain CPn as a
quotient space of the disk D2n under the identiп¬Ғcations v вҲјО»v for v вҲҲвҲӮD2n , in the
following way. The vectors in S2n+1 вҠӮCn+1 with last coordinate real and nonnegative
are precisely the vectors of the form (w,
p
1 вҲ’|w|2 ) вҲҲCnГ—C with |w| вүӨ1. Such
vectors form the graph of the function w ,
p
1 вҲ’|w|2 . This is a disk D2n
+
bounded
by the sphere S2nвҲ’1 вҠӮS2n+1 consisting of vectors (w, 0) вҲҲCnГ—C with |w| = 1. Each
vector in S2n+1 is equivalent under the identiп¬Ғcations v вҲјО»v to a vector in D2n
+ , and
the latter vector is unique if its last coordinate is nonzero. If the last coordinate is
zero, we have just the identiп¬Ғcations v вҲјО»v for v вҲҲS2nвҲ’1 .
From this description of CPn as the quotient of D2n
+
under the identiп¬Ғcations
v вҲјО»v for v вҲҲS2nвҲ’1 it follows that CPn is obtained from CPnвҲ’1 by attaching a
cell e2n via the quotient map S2nвҲ’1вҶ’CPnвҲ’1 . So by induction on n we obtain a cell
structure CPn = e0 вҲӘe2 вҲӘВ·В·В· вҲӘe2n with cells only in even dimensions. Similarly, CPвҲһ
has a cell structure with one cell in each even dimension.
After these examples we return now to general theory.
Each cell en
Оұ in a cell
complex X has a characteristic map ОҰОұ : Dn
ОұвҶ’X which extends the attaching map
П•Оұ and is a homeomorphism from the interior of Dn
Оұ onto en
Оұ . Namely, we can take
ОҰОұ to be the composition Dn
Оұ > XnвҲ’1`
Оұ Dn
ОұвҶ’Xn > X where the middle map is
the quotient map deп¬Ғning Xn . For example, in the canonical cell structure on Sn
described in Example 0.3, a characteristic map for the n cell is the quotient map
DnвҶ’Sn collapsing вҲӮDn to a point. For RPn a characteristic map for the cell ei is
the quotient map DiвҶ’RPi вҠӮRPn identifying antipodal points of вҲӮDi , and similarly
for CPn .
A subcomplex of a cell complex X is a closed subspace A вҠӮX that is a union
of cells of X . Since A is closed, the characteristic map of each cell in A has image
contained in A, and in particular the image of the attaching map of each cell in A is
contained in A, so A is a cell complex in its own right. A pair (X, A) consisting of a
cell complex X and a subcomplex A will be called a CW pair.
For example, each skeleton Xn of a cell complex X is a subcomplex. Particular
cases of this are the subcomplexes RPk вҠӮRPn and CPk вҠӮCPn for k вүӨn. These are
in fact the only subcomplexes of RPn and CPn .
There are natural inclusions S0 вҠӮS1 вҠӮВ·В·В· вҠӮSn , but these subspheres are not
subcomplexes of Sn in its usual cell structure with just two cells. However, we can give
Sn a different cell structure in which each of the subspheres Sk is a subcomplex, by
regarding each Sk as being obtained inductively from the equatorial SkвҲ’1 by attaching
two k cells, the components of SkвҲ’SkвҲ’1 . The inп¬Ғnite-dimensional sphere SвҲһ=
S
n Sn
then becomes a cell complex as well. Note that the two-to-one quotient map SвҲһвҶ’RPвҲһ
that identiп¬Ғes antipodal points of SвҲһidentiп¬Ғes the two n cells of SвҲһto the single
n cell of RPвҲһ.

8
Chapter 0
Some Underlying Geometric Notions
In the examples of cell complexes given so far, the closure of each cell is a sub-
complex, and more generally the closure of any collection of cells is a subcomplex.
Most naturally arising cell structures have this property, but it need not hold in gen-
eral. For example, if we start with S1 with its minimal cell structure and attach to this
a 2 cell by a map S1вҶ’S1 whose image is a nontrivial subarc of S1 , then the closure
of the 2 cell is not a subcomplex since it contains only a part of the 1 cell.
Operations on Spaces
Cell complexes have a very nice mixture of rigidity and п¬Ӯexibility, with enough
rigidity to allow many arguments to proceed in a combinatorial cell-by-cell fashion
and enough п¬Ӯexibility to allow many natural constructions to be performed on them.
Here are some of those constructions.
Products.
If X and Y are cell complexes, then XГ—Y has the structure of a cell
complex with cells the products em
Оұ Г—en
ОІ where em
Оұ
ranges over the cells of X and
en
ОІ ranges over the cells of Y . For example, the cell structure on the torus S1Г—S1
described at the beginning of this section is obtained in this way from the standard
cell structure on S1 . For completely general CW complexes X and Y there is one
small complication: The topology on XГ—Y as a cell complex is sometimes п¬Ғner than
the product topology, with more open sets than the product topology has, though the
two topologies coincide if either X or Y has only п¬Ғnitely many cells, or if both X
and Y have countably many cells. This is explained in the Appendix. In practice this
subtle issue of point-set topology rarely causes problems, however.
Quotients. If (X, A) is a CW pair consisting of a cell complex X and a subcomplex A,
then the quotient space X/A inherits a natural cell complex structure from X . The
cells of X/A are the cells of X вҲ’A plus one new 0 cell, the image of A in X/A. For a
cell en
Оұ of X вҲ’A attached by П•Оұ : SnвҲ’1вҶ’XnвҲ’1 , the attaching map for the correspond-
ing cell in X/A is the composition SnвҲ’1вҶ’XnвҲ’1вҶ’XnвҲ’1/AnвҲ’1 .
For example, if we give SnвҲ’1 any cell structure and build Dn from SnвҲ’1 by attach-
ing an n cell, then the quotient Dn/SnвҲ’1 is Sn with its usual cell structure. As another
example, take X to be a closed orientable surface with the cell structure described at
the beginning of this section, with a single 2 cell, and let A be the complement of this
2 cell, the 1 skeleton of X . Then X/A has a cell structure consisting of a 0 cell with
a 2 cell attached, and there is only one way to attach a cell to a 0 cell, by the constant
map, so X/A is S2 .
Suspension. For a space X , the suspension SX is the quotient of
XГ—I obtained by collapsing XГ—{0} to one point and XГ—{1} to an-
other point. The motivating example is X = Sn , when SX = Sn+1
with the two вҖҳsuspension pointsвҖҷ at the north and south poles of
Sn+1 , the points (0, В·В·В· , 0, Вұ1). One can regard SX as a double cone
