[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 0. Some Underlying Geometric Notions
현재 소단원: 0.3 Operations on Spaces
직전 소단원: 「0.2 Cell Complexes」
[본문]
8
Chapter 0
Some Underlying Geometric Notions
In the examples of cell complexes given so far, the closure of each cell is a sub-
complex, and more generally the closure of any collection of cells is a subcomplex.
Most naturally arising cell structures have this property, but it need not hold in gen-
eral. For example, if we start with S1 with its minimal cell structure and attach to this
a 2 cell by a map S1→S1 whose image is a nontrivial subarc of S1 , then the closure
of the 2 cell is not a subcomplex since it contains only a part of the 1 cell.
Operations on Spaces
Cell complexes have a very nice mixture of rigidity and ﬂexibility, with enough
rigidity to allow many arguments to proceed in a combinatorial cell-by-cell fashion
and enough ﬂexibility to allow many natural constructions to be performed on them.
Here are some of those constructions.
Products.
If X and Y are cell complexes, then X×Y has the structure of a cell
complex with cells the products em
α ×en
β where em
α
ranges over the cells of X and
en
β ranges over the cells of Y . For example, the cell structure on the torus S1×S1
described at the beginning of this section is obtained in this way from the standard
cell structure on S1 . For completely general CW complexes X and Y there is one
small complication: The topology on X×Y as a cell complex is sometimes ﬁner than
the product topology, with more open sets than the product topology has, though the
two topologies coincide if either X or Y has only ﬁnitely many cells, or if both X
and Y have countably many cells. This is explained in the Appendix. In practice this
subtle issue of point-set topology rarely causes problems, however.
Quotients. If (X, A) is a CW pair consisting of a cell complex X and a subcomplex A,
then the quotient space X/A inherits a natural cell complex structure from X . The
cells of X/A are the cells of X −A plus one new 0 cell, the image of A in X/A. For a
cell en
α of X −A attached by ϕα : Sn−1→Xn−1 , the attaching map for the correspond-
ing cell in X/A is the composition Sn−1→Xn−1→Xn−1/An−1 .
For example, if we give Sn−1 any cell structure and build Dn from Sn−1 by attach-
ing an n cell, then the quotient Dn/Sn−1 is Sn with its usual cell structure. As another
example, take X to be a closed orientable surface with the cell structure described at
the beginning of this section, with a single 2 cell, and let A be the complement of this
2 cell, the 1 skeleton of X . Then X/A has a cell structure consisting of a 0 cell with
a 2 cell attached, and there is only one way to attach a cell to a 0 cell, by the constant
map, so X/A is S2 .
Suspension. For a space X , the suspension SX is the quotient of
X×I obtained by collapsing X×{0} to one point and X×{1} to an-
other point. The motivating example is X = Sn , when SX = Sn+1
with the two ‘suspension points’ at the north and south poles of
Sn+1 , the points (0, ··· , 0, ±1). One can regard SX as a double cone

Operations on Spaces
Chapter 0
9
on X , the union of two copies of the cone CX = (X×I)/(X×{0}). If X is a CW com-
plex, so are SX and CX as quotients of X×I with its product cell structure, I being
given the standard cell structure of two 0 cells joined by a 1 cell.
Suspension becomes increasingly important the farther one goes into algebraic
topology, though why this should be so is certainly not evident in advance.
One
especially useful property of suspension is that not only spaces but also maps can be
suspended. Namely, a map f : X→Y suspends to Sf : SX→SY , the quotient map of
f ×11 : X×I→Y ×I .
Join. The cone CX is the union of all line segments joining points of X to an external
vertex, and similarly the suspension SX is the union of all line segments joining points
of X to two external vertices. More generally, given X and a second space Y , one can
deﬁne the space of all lines segments joining points in X to points in Y . This is
the join X ∗Y , the quotient space of X×Y ×I under the identiﬁcations (x, y1, 0) ∼
(x, y2, 0) and (x1, y, 1) ∼(x2, y, 1). Thus we are collapsing the subspace X×Y ×{0}
to X and X×Y ×{1} to Y . For example, if
X and Y are both closed intervals, then we
are collapsing two opposite faces of a cube
onto line segments so that the cube becomes
a tetrahedron.
In the general case, X ∗Y
X
I
Y
contains copies of X and Y at its two ‘ends,’
and every other point (x, y, t) in X ∗Y is on a unique line segment joining the point
x ∈X ⊂X ∗Y to the point y ∈Y ⊂X ∗Y , the segment obtained by ﬁxing x and y
and letting the coordinate t in (x, y, t) vary.
A nice way to write points of X ∗Y is as formal linear combinations t1x + t2y
with 0 ≤ti ≤1 and t1+t2 = 1, subject to the rules 0x+1y = y and 1x+0y = x that
correspond exactly to the identiﬁcations deﬁning X ∗Y . In much the same way, an
iterated join X1 ∗···∗Xn can be regarded as the space of formal linear combinations
t1x1 + ··· + tnxn with 0 ≤ti ≤1 and t1 + ··· + tn = 1, with the convention that
terms 0ti can be omitted. This viewpoint makes it easy to see that the join operation
is associative. A very special case that plays a central role in algebraic topology is
when each Xi is just a point. For example, the join of two points is a line segment, the
join of three points is a triangle, and the join of four points is a tetrahedron. The join
of n points is a convex polyhedron of dimension n −1 called a simplex. Concretely,
if the n points are the n standard basis vectors for Rn , then their join is the space
∆n−1 = { (t1, ··· , tn) ∈Rn || t1 + ··· + tn = 1 and ti ≥0 }.
Another interesting example is when each Xi is S0 , two points. If we take the two
points of Xi to be the two unit vectors along the ith coordinate axis in Rn , then the
join X1 ∗···∗Xn is the union of 2n copies of the simplex ∆n−1 , and radial projection
from the origin gives a homeomorphism between X1 ∗··· ∗Xn and Sn−1 .

10
Chapter 0
Some Underlying Geometric Notions
If X and Y are CW complexes, then there is a natural CW structure on X ∗Y
having the subspaces X and Y as subcomplexes, with the remaining cells being the
product cells of X×Y ×(0, 1). As usual with products, the CW topology on X ∗Y may
be weaker than the quotient of the product topology on X×Y ×I .
Wedge Sum. This is a rather trivial but still quite useful operation. Given spaces X and
Y with chosen points x0 ∈X and y0 ∈Y , then the wedge sum X ∨Y is the quotient
of the disjoint union X ⨿Y obtained by identifying x0 and y0 to a single point. For
example, S1 ∨S1 is homeomorphic to the ﬁgure ‘8,’ two circles touching at a point.
More generally one could form the wedge sum
W
α Xα of an arbitrary collection of
spaces Xα by starting with the disjoint union
`
α Xα and identifying points xα ∈Xα
to a single point. In case the spaces Xα are cell complexes and the points xα are
0 cells, then
W
α Xα is a cell complex since it is obtained from the cell complex
`
α Xα
by collapsing a subcomplex to a point.
For any cell complex X , the quotient Xn/Xn−1 is a wedge sum of n spheres
W
α Sn
α ,
with one sphere for each n cell of X .
Smash Product. Like suspension, this is another construction whose importance be-
comes evident only later. Inside a product space X×Y there are copies of X and Y ,
namely X×{y0} and {x0}×Y for points x0 ∈X and y0 ∈Y . These two copies of X
and Y in X×Y intersect only at the point (x0, y0), so their union can be identiﬁed
with the wedge sum X ∨Y . The smash product X ∧Y is then deﬁned to be the quo-
tient X×Y/X ∨Y . One can think of X ∧Y as a reduced version of X×Y obtained
by collapsing away the parts that are not genuinely a product, the separate factors X
and Y .
The smash product X ∧Y is a cell complex if X and Y are cell complexes with x0
and y0 0 cells, assuming that we give X×Y the cell-complex topology rather than the
product topology in cases when these two topologies differ. For example, Sm∧Sn has
a cell structure with just two cells, of dimensions 0 and m+n, hence Sm∧Sn = Sm+n .
In particular, when m = n = 1 we see that collapsing longitude and meridian circles
of a torus to a point produces a 2 sphere.
Two Criteria for Homotopy Equivalence
Earlier in this chapter the main tool we used for constructing homotopy equiva-
lences was the fact that a mapping cylinder deformation retracts onto its ‘target’ end.
By repeated application of this fact one can often produce homotopy equivalences be-
tween rather different-looking spaces. However, this process can be a bit cumbersome
in practice, so it is useful to have other techniques available as well. We will describe
two commonly used methods here. The ﬁrst involves collapsing certain subspaces to
points, and the second involves varying the way in which the parts of a space are put
together.
