[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 0. Some Underlying Geometric Notions
현재 소단원: 0.4 Two Criteria for Homotopy Equivalence
직전 소단원: 「0.3 Operations on Spaces」
[본문]
10
Chapter 0
Some Underlying Geometric Notions
If X and Y are CW complexes, then there is a natural CW structure on X ∗Y
having the subspaces X and Y as subcomplexes, with the remaining cells being the
product cells of X×Y ×(0, 1). As usual with products, the CW topology on X ∗Y may
be weaker than the quotient of the product topology on X×Y ×I .
Wedge Sum. This is a rather trivial but still quite useful operation. Given spaces X and
Y with chosen points x0 ∈X and y0 ∈Y , then the wedge sum X ∨Y is the quotient
of the disjoint union X ⨿Y obtained by identifying x0 and y0 to a single point. For
example, S1 ∨S1 is homeomorphic to the ﬁgure ‘8,’ two circles touching at a point.
More generally one could form the wedge sum
W
α Xα of an arbitrary collection of
spaces Xα by starting with the disjoint union
`
α Xα and identifying points xα ∈Xα
to a single point. In case the spaces Xα are cell complexes and the points xα are
0 cells, then
W
α Xα is a cell complex since it is obtained from the cell complex
`
α Xα
by collapsing a subcomplex to a point.
For any cell complex X , the quotient Xn/Xn−1 is a wedge sum of n spheres
W
α Sn
α ,
with one sphere for each n cell of X .
Smash Product. Like suspension, this is another construction whose importance be-
comes evident only later. Inside a product space X×Y there are copies of X and Y ,
namely X×{y0} and {x0}×Y for points x0 ∈X and y0 ∈Y . These two copies of X
and Y in X×Y intersect only at the point (x0, y0), so their union can be identiﬁed
with the wedge sum X ∨Y . The smash product X ∧Y is then deﬁned to be the quo-
tient X×Y/X ∨Y . One can think of X ∧Y as a reduced version of X×Y obtained
by collapsing away the parts that are not genuinely a product, the separate factors X
and Y .
The smash product X ∧Y is a cell complex if X and Y are cell complexes with x0
and y0 0 cells, assuming that we give X×Y the cell-complex topology rather than the
product topology in cases when these two topologies differ. For example, Sm∧Sn has
a cell structure with just two cells, of dimensions 0 and m+n, hence Sm∧Sn = Sm+n .
In particular, when m = n = 1 we see that collapsing longitude and meridian circles
of a torus to a point produces a 2 sphere.
Two Criteria for Homotopy Equivalence
Earlier in this chapter the main tool we used for constructing homotopy equiva-
lences was the fact that a mapping cylinder deformation retracts onto its ‘target’ end.
By repeated application of this fact one can often produce homotopy equivalences be-
tween rather different-looking spaces. However, this process can be a bit cumbersome
in practice, so it is useful to have other techniques available as well. We will describe
two commonly used methods here. The ﬁrst involves collapsing certain subspaces to
points, and the second involves varying the way in which the parts of a space are put
together.

Two Criteria for Homotopy Equivalence
Chapter 0
11
Collapsing Subspaces
The operation of collapsing a subspace to a point usually has a drastic effect
on homotopy type, but one might hope that if the subspace being collapsed already
has the homotopy type of a point, then collapsing it to a point might not change the
homotopy type of the whole space. Here is a positive result in this direction:
If (X, A) is a CW pair consisting of a CW complex X and a contractible subcomplex A,
then the quotient map X→X/A is a homotopy equivalence.
A proof will be given later in Proposition 0.17, but for now let us look at some examples
showing how this result can be applied.
Example 0.7: Graphs. The three graphs
are homotopy equivalent since
each is a deformation retract of a disk with two holes, but we can also deduce this
from the collapsing criterion above since collapsing the middle edge of the ﬁrst and
third graphs produces the second graph.
More generally, suppose X is any graph with ﬁnitely many vertices and edges. If
the two endpoints of any edge of X are distinct, we can collapse this edge to a point,
producing a homotopy equivalent graph with one fewer edge. This simpliﬁcation can
be repeated until all edges of X are loops, and then each component of X is either
an isolated vertex or a wedge sum of circles.
This raises the question of whether two such graphs, having only one vertex in
each component, can be homotopy equivalent if they are not in fact just isomorphic
graphs. Exercise 12 at the end of the chapter reduces the question to the case of
connected graphs. Then the task is to prove that a wedge sum
W
m S1 of m circles is not
homotopy equivalent to
W
n S1 if m ≠n. This sort of thing is hard to do directly. What
one would like is some sort of algebraic object associated to spaces, depending only
on their homotopy type, and taking different values for
W
m S1 and
W
n S1 if m ≠n. In
fact the Euler characteristic does this since
W
m S1 has Euler characteristic 1−m. But it
is a rather nontrivial theorem that the Euler characteristic of a space depends only on
its homotopy type. A different algebraic invariant that works equally well for graphs,
and whose rigorous development requires less effort than the Euler characteristic, is
the fundamental group of a space, the subject of Chapter 1.
Example 0.8. Consider the space X obtained
from S2 by attaching the two ends of an arc
A to two distinct points on the sphere, say the
north and south poles. Let B be an arc in S2
joining the two points where A attaches. Then
X can be given a CW complex structure with
the two endpoints of A and B as 0 cells, the
interiors of A and B as 1 cells, and the rest of
S2 as a 2 cell. Since A and B are contractible,
A
X
X/
X/
B
A
B

12
Chapter 0
Some Underlying Geometric Notions
X/A and X/B are homotopy equivalent to X . The space X/A is the quotient S2/S0 ,
the sphere with two points identiﬁed, and X/B is S1 ∨S2 . Hence S2/S0 and S1 ∨S2
are homotopy equivalent, a fact which may not be entirely obvious at ﬁrst glance.
Example 0.9.
Let X be the union of a torus with n meridional disks.
To obtain
a CW structure on X , choose a longitudinal circle in the torus, intersecting each of
the meridional disks in one point. These intersection points are then the 0 cells, the
1 cells are the rest of the longitudinal circle and the boundary circles of the meridional
disks, and the 2 cells are the remaining regions of the torus and the interiors of
the meridional disks. Collapsing each meridional disk to a point yields a homotopy
X
Y
Z
W 
equivalent space Y consisting of n 2 spheres, each tangent to its two neighbors, a
‘necklace with n beads.’ The third space Z in the ﬁgure, a strand of n beads with a
string joining its two ends, collapses to Y by collapsing the string to a point, so this
collapse is a homotopy equivalence. Finally, by collapsing the arc in Z formed by the
front halves of the equators of the n beads, we obtain the fourth space W , a wedge
sum of S1 with n 2 spheres. (One can see why a wedge sum is sometimes called a
‘bouquet’ in the older literature.)
Example 0.10: Reduced Suspension. Let X be a CW complex and x0 ∈X a 0 cell.
Inside the suspension SX we have the line segment {x0}×I , and collapsing this to a
point yields a space ΣX homotopy equivalent to SX , called the reduced suspension
of X . For example, if we take X to be S1 ∨S1 with x0 the intersection point of the
two circles, then the ordinary suspension SX is the union of two spheres intersecting
along the arc {x0}×I , so the reduced suspension ΣX is S2 ∨S2 , a slightly simpler
space. More generally we have Σ(X ∨Y) = ΣX ∨ΣY for arbitrary CW complexes X
and Y . Another way in which the reduced suspension ΣX is slightly simpler than SX
is in its CW structure. In SX there are two 0 cells (the two suspension points) and an
(n + 1) cell en×(0, 1) for each n cell en of X , whereas in ΣX there is a single 0 cell
and an (n + 1) cell for each n cell of X other than the 0 cell x0 .
The reduced suspension ΣX is actually the same as the smash product X ∧S1
since both spaces are the quotient of X×I with X×∂I ∪{x0}×I collapsed to a point.
Attaching Spaces
Another common way to change a space without changing its homotopy type in-
volves the idea of continuously varying how its parts are attached together. A general
deﬁnition of ‘attaching one space to another’ that includes the case of attaching cells

Two Criteria for Homotopy Equivalence
Chapter 0
13
is the following. We start with a space X0 and another space X1 that we wish to
attach to X0 by identifying the points in a subspace A ⊂X1 with points of X0 . The
data needed to do this is a map f : A→X0 , for then we can form a quotient space
of X0 ⨿X1 by identifying each point a ∈A with its image f (a) ∈X0 . Let us de-
note this quotient space by X0 ⊔f X1 , the space X0 with X1 attached along A via f .
When (X1, A) = (Dn, Sn−1) we have the case of attaching an n cell to X0 via a map
f : Sn−1→X0 .
Mapping cylinders are examples of this construction, since the mapping cylinder
Mf of a map f : X→Y is the space obtained from Y by attaching X×I along X×{1}
via f . Closely related to the mapping cylinder Mf is the mapping cone Cf = Y ⊔f CX
where CX is the cone (X×I)/(X×{0}) and we attach this to Y
along X×{1} via the identiﬁcations (x, 1) ∼f (x). For exam-
ple, when X is a sphere Sn−1 the mapping cone Cf is the space
obtained from Y by attaching an n cell via f : Sn−1→Y .
A
mapping cone Cf can also be viewed as the quotient Mf /X of
the mapping cylinder Mf with the subspace X = X×{0} collapsed to a point.
CX
Y
If one varies an attaching map f by a homotopy ft , one gets a family of spaces
whose shape is undergoing a continuous change, it would seem, and one might expect
these spaces all to have the same homotopy type. This is often the case:
If (X1, A) is a CW pair and the two attaching maps f , g : A→X0 are homotopic, then
X0 ⊔f X1 ≃X0 ⊔g X1 .
Again let us defer the proof and look at some examples.
Example 0.11. Let us rederive the result in Example 0.8 that a sphere with two points
A
S
1
S
2
identiﬁed is homotopy equivalent to S1 ∨S2 . The sphere
with two points identiﬁed can be obtained by attaching S2
to S1 by a map that wraps a closed arc A in S2 around S1 ,
as shown in the ﬁgure. Since A is contractible, this attach-
ing map is homotopic to a constant map, and attaching S2
to S1 via a constant map of A yields S1 ∨S2 . The result
then follows since (S2, A) is a CW pair, S2 being obtained from A by attaching a
2 cell.
Example 0.12.
In similar fashion we can see that the necklace in Example 0.9 is
homotopy equivalent to the wedge sum of a circle with n 2 spheres. The necklace
can be obtained from a circle by attaching n 2 spheres along arcs, so the necklace
is homotopy equivalent to the space obtained by attaching n 2 spheres to a circle
at points. Then we can slide these attaching points around the circle until they all
coincide, producing the wedge sum.
Example 0.13. Here is an application of the earlier fact that collapsing a contractible
subcomplex is a homotopy equivalence: If (X, A) is a CW pair, consisting of a cell

14
Chapter 0
Some Underlying Geometric Notions
complex X and a subcomplex A, then X/A ≃X ∪CA, the mapping cone of the
inclusion A>X . For we have X/A = (X∪CA)/CA ≃X∪CA since CA is a contractible
subcomplex of X ∪CA.
Example 0.14. If (X, A) is a CW pair and A is contractible in X , that is, the inclusion
A>X is homotopic to a constant map, then X/A ≃X ∨SA. Namely, by the previous
example we have X/A ≃X ∪CA, and then since A is contractible in X , the mapping
cone X ∪CA of the inclusion A> X is homotopy equivalent to the mapping cone of
a constant map, which is X ∨SA. For example, Sn/Si ≃Sn ∨Si+1 for i < n, since
Si is contractible in Sn if i < n. In particular this gives S2/S0 ≃S2 ∨S1 , which is
Example 0.8 again.
The Homotopy Extension Property
In this ﬁnal section of the chapter we will actually prove a few things. In partic-
ular we prove the two criteria for homotopy equivalence described above, along with
the fact that any two homotopy equivalent spaces can be embedded as deformation
retracts of the same space.
The proofs depend upon a technical property that arises in many other contexts
as well. Consider the following problem. Suppose one is given a map f0 : X→Y , and
on a subspace A ⊂X one is also given a homotopy ft : A→Y of f0 ||A that one would
like to extend to a homotopy ft : X→Y of the given f0 . If the pair (X, A) is such that
this extension problem can always be solved, one says that (X, A) has the homotopy
extension property. Thus (X, A) has the homotopy extension property if every map
X×{0} ∪A×I→Y can be extended to a map X×I→Y .
In particular, the homotopy extension property for (X, A) implies that the iden-
tity map X×{0} ∪A×I→X×{0} ∪A×I extends to a map X×I→X×{0} ∪A×I , so
X×{0} ∪A×I is a retract of X×I . The converse is also true: If there is a retraction
X×I→X×{0} ∪A×I , then by composing with this retraction we can extend every
map X×{0} ∪A×I→Y to a map X×I→Y . Thus the homotopy extension property
for (X, A) is equivalent to X×{0} ∪A×I being a retract of X×I . This implies for ex-
ample that if (X, A) has the homotopy extension property, then so does (X×Z, A×Z)
for any space Z , a fact that would not be so easy to prove directly from the deﬁnition.
If (X, A) has the homotopy extension property, then A must be a closed subspace
of X , at least when X is Hausdorff. For if r : X×I→X×I is a retraction onto the
subspace X×{0} ∪A×I , then the image of r is the set of points z ∈X×I with
r(z) = z, a closed set if X is Hausdorff, so X×{0}∪A×I is closed in X×I and hence
A is closed in X .
A simple example of a pair (X, A) with A closed for which the homotopy exten-
sion property fails is the pair (I, A) where A = {0, 1,1/2,1/3,1/4, ···}. It is not hard to
show that there is no continuous retraction I×I→I×{0} ∪A×I . The breakdown of
homotopy extension here can be attributed to the bad structure of (X, A) near 0.
