[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 0. Some Underlying Geometric Notions
현재 소단원: 0.ex Exercises
직전 소단원: 「0.5 The Homotopy Extension Property」
[연습문제]
18
Chapter 0
Some Underlying Geometric Notions
Exercises
1. Construct an explicit deformation retraction of the torus with one point deleted
onto a graph consisting of two circles intersecting in a point, namely, longitude and
meridian circles of the torus.
2. Construct an explicit deformation retraction of Rn −{0} onto Sn−1 .
3. (a) Show that the composition of homotopy equivalences X→Y and Y→Z is a
homotopy equivalence X→Z . Deduce that homotopy equivalence is an equivalence
relation.
(b) Show that the relation of homotopy among maps X→Y is an equivalence relation.
(c) Show that a map homotopic to a homotopy equivalence is a homotopy equivalence.
4. A deformation retraction in the weak sense of a space X to a subspace A is a
homotopy ft : X→X such that f0 = 11, f1(X) ⊂A, and ft(A) ⊂A for all t . Show
that if X deformation retracts to A in this weak sense, then the inclusion A > X is
a homotopy equivalence.
5.
Show that if a space X deformation retracts to a point x ∈X , then for each
neighborhood U of x in X there exists a neighborhood V ⊂U of x such that the
inclusion map V > U is nullhomotopic.
6. (a) Let X be the subspace of R2 consisting of the horizontal segment
[0, 1]×{0} together with all the vertical segments {r}×[0, 1 −r] for
r a rational number in [0, 1]. Show that X deformation retracts to
any point in the segment [0, 1]×{0}, but not to any other point. [See
the preceding problem.]
(b) Let Y be the subspace of R2 that is the union of an inﬁnite number of copies of X
arranged as in the ﬁgure below. Show that Y is contractible but does not deformation
retract onto any point.
(c) Let Z be the zigzag subspace of Y homeomorphic to R indicated by the heavier
line. Show there is a deformation retraction in the weak sense (see Exercise 4) of Y
onto Z , but no true deformation retraction.
7. Fill in the details in the following construction from
[Edwards 1999] of a compact space Y ⊂R3 with the
same properties as the space Y in Exercise 6, that is, Y
is contractible but does not deformation retract to any
point. To begin, let X be the union of an inﬁnite se-
X
Y
quence of cones on the Cantor set arranged end-to-end,
as in the ﬁgure. Next, form the one-point compactiﬁca-
tion of X×R. This embeds in R3 as a closed disk with curved ‘ﬁns’ attached along

Exercises
Chapter 0
19
circular arcs, and with the one-point compactiﬁcation of X as a cross-sectional slice.
The desired space Y is then obtained from this subspace of R3 by wrapping one more
cone on the Cantor set around the boundary of the disk.
8. For n > 2, construct an n room analog of the house with two rooms.
9. Show that a retract of a contractible space is contractible.
10. Show that a space X is contractible iff every map f : X→Y , for arbitrary Y , is
nullhomotopic. Similarly, show X is contractible iff every map f : Y→X is nullho-
motopic.
11. Show that f : X→Y is a homotopy equivalence if there exist maps g, h : Y→X
such that f g ≃11 and hf ≃11. More generally, show that f is a homotopy equiva-
lence if f g and hf are homotopy equivalences.
12. Show that a homotopy equivalence f : X→Y induces a bijection between the set
of path-components of X and the set of path-components of Y , and that f restricts to
a homotopy equivalence from each path-component of X to the corresponding path-
component of Y . Prove also the corresponding statements with components instead
of path-components. Deduce that if the components of a space X coincide with its
path-components, then the same holds for any space Y homotopy equivalent to X .
13.
Show that any two deformation retractions r 0
t
and r 1
t
of a space X onto a
subspace A can be joined by a continuous family of deformation retractions r s
t ,
0 ≤s ≤1, of X onto A, where continuity means that the map X×I×I→X sending
(x, s, t) to r s
t (x) is continuous.
14. Given positive integers v , e, and f satisfying v −e + f = 2, construct a cell
structure on S2 having v 0 cells, e 1 cells, and f 2 cells.
15. Enumerate all the subcomplexes of S∞, with the cell structure on S∞that has Sn
as its n skeleton.
16. Show that S∞is contractible.
17. (a) Show that the mapping cylinder of every map f : S1→S1 is a CW complex.
(b) Construct a 2 dimensional CW complex that contains both an annulus S1×I and
a M¨obius band as deformation retracts.
18. Show that S1 ∗S1 = S3 , and more generally Sm ∗Sn = Sm+n+1 .
19. Show that the space obtained from S2 by attaching n 2 cells along any collection
of n circles in S2 is homotopy equivalent to the wedge sum of n + 1 2 spheres.
20.
Show that the subspace X ⊂R3 formed by a Klein bottle
intersecting itself in a circle, as shown in the ﬁgure, is homotopy
equivalent to S1 ∨S1 ∨S2 .
21. If X is a connected space that is a union of a ﬁnite number of 2 spheres, any
two of which intersect in at most one point, show that X is homotopy equivalent to a
wedge sum of S1 ’s and S2 ’s.

20
Chapter 0
Some Underlying Geometric Notions
22. Let X be a ﬁnite graph lying in a half-plane P ⊂R3 and intersecting the edge
of P in a subset of the vertices of X . Describe the homotopy type of the ‘surface of
revolution’ obtained by rotating X about the edge line of P .
23.
Show that a CW complex is contractible if it is the union of two contractible
subcomplexes whose intersection is also contractible.
24. Let X and Y be CW complexes with 0 cells x0 and y0 . Show that the quotient
spaces X ∗Y/(X ∗{y0}∪{x0}∗Y) and S(X ∧Y)/S({x0}∧{y0}) are homeomorphic,
and deduce that X ∗Y ≃S(X ∧Y).
25. If X is a CW complex with components Xα , show that the suspension SX is
homotopy equivalent to Y
W
α SXα for some graph Y . In the case that X is a ﬁnite
graph, show that SX is homotopy equivalent to a wedge sum of circles and 2 spheres.
26. Use Corollary 0.20 to show that if (X, A) has the homotopy extension property,
then X×I deformation retracts to X×{0} ∪A×I . Deduce from this that Proposi-
tion 0.18 holds more generally for any pair (X1, A) satisfying the homotopy extension
property.
27. Given a pair (X, A) and a homotopy equivalence f : A→B , show that the natural
map X→B⊔f X is a homotopy equivalence if (X, A) satisﬁes the homotopy extension
property. [Hint: Consider X ∪Mf and use the preceding problem.] An interesting
case is when f is a quotient map, hence the map X→B ⊔f X is the quotient map
identifying each set f −1(b) to a point. When B is a point this gives another proof of
Proposition 0.17.
28. Show that if (X1, A) satisﬁes the homotopy extension property, then so does every
pair (X0 ⊔f X1, X0) obtained by attaching X1 to a space X0 via a map f : A→X0 .
29. In case the CW complex X is obtained from a subcomplex A by attaching a single
cell en , describe exactly what the extension of a homotopy ft : A→Y to X given by
the proof of Proposition 0.16 looks like. That is, for a point x ∈en , describe the path
ft(x) for the extended ft .

Algebraic topology can be roughly deﬁned as the study of techniques for forming
algebraic images of topological spaces. Most often these algebraic images are groups,
but more elaborate structures such as rings, modules, and algebras also arise. The
mechanisms that create these images — the ‘lanterns’ of algebraic topology, one might
say — are known formally as functors and have the characteristic feature that they
form images not only of spaces but also of maps. Thus, continuous maps between
spaces are projected onto homomorphisms between their algebraic images, so topo-
logically related spaces have algebraically related images.
With suitably constructed lanterns one might hope to be able to form images with
enough detail to reconstruct accurately the shapes of all spaces, or at least of large
and interesting classes of spaces. This is one of the main goals of algebraic topology,
and to a surprising extent this goal is achieved. Of course, the lanterns necessary to
do this are somewhat complicated pieces of machinery. But this machinery also has
a certain intrinsic beauty.
This ﬁrst chapter introduces one of the simplest and most important functors
of algebraic topology, the fundamental group, which creates an algebraic image of a
space from the loops in the space, the paths in the space starting and ending at the
same point.
The Idea of the Fundamental Group
To get a feeling for what the fundamental group is about, let us look at a few
preliminary examples before giving the formal deﬁnitions.
