[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 1. The Fundamental Group
현재 소단원: 1.1 Basic Constructions
직전 소단원: 「0.ex Exercises」
[본문]
Algebraic topology can be roughly deﬁned as the study of techniques for forming
algebraic images of topological spaces. Most often these algebraic images are groups,
but more elaborate structures such as rings, modules, and algebras also arise. The
mechanisms that create these images — the ‘lanterns’ of algebraic topology, one might
say — are known formally as functors and have the characteristic feature that they
form images not only of spaces but also of maps. Thus, continuous maps between
spaces are projected onto homomorphisms between their algebraic images, so topo-
logically related spaces have algebraically related images.
With suitably constructed lanterns one might hope to be able to form images with
enough detail to reconstruct accurately the shapes of all spaces, or at least of large
and interesting classes of spaces. This is one of the main goals of algebraic topology,
and to a surprising extent this goal is achieved. Of course, the lanterns necessary to
do this are somewhat complicated pieces of machinery. But this machinery also has
a certain intrinsic beauty.
This ﬁrst chapter introduces one of the simplest and most important functors
of algebraic topology, the fundamental group, which creates an algebraic image of a
space from the loops in the space, the paths in the space starting and ending at the
same point.
The Idea of the Fundamental Group
To get a feeling for what the fundamental group is about, let us look at a few
preliminary examples before giving the formal deﬁnitions.

22
Chapter 1
The Fundamental Group
Consider two linked circles A and B in R3 , as shown
in the ﬁgure. Our experience with actual links and chains
A
B
tells us that since the two circles are linked, it is impossi-
ble to separate B from A by any continuous motion of B ,
such as pushing, pulling, or twisting. We could even take
B to be made of rubber or stretchable string and allow completely general continu-
ous deformations of B , staying in the complement of A at all times, and it would
still be impossible to pull B off A. At least that is what intuition suggests, and the
fundamental group will give a way of making this intuition mathematically rigorous.
Instead of having B link with A just once, we could
make it link with A two or more times, as in the ﬁgures to the
right. As a further variation, by assigning an orientation to B
A
A
B−3
B 2
we can speak of B linking A a positive or a negative number
of times, say positive when B comes forward through A and
negative for the reverse direction. Thus for each nonzero
integer n we have an oriented circle Bn linking A n times,
where by ‘circle’ we mean a curve homeomorphic to a circle.
To complete the scheme, we could let B0 be a circle not
linked to A at all.
Now, integers not only measure quantity, but they form a group under addition.
Can the group operation be mimicked geometrically with some sort of addition op-
eration on the oriented circles B linking A? An oriented circle B can be thought
of as a path traversed in time, starting and ending at the same point x0 , which we
can choose to be any point on the circle.
Such a path starting and ending at the
same point is called a loop. Two different loops B and B′ both starting and end-
ing at the same point x0 can be ‘added’ to form a new loop B + B′ that travels ﬁrst
around B , then around B′ . For example, if B1 and B′
1 are loops each linking A once in
A
B1
B1
x0
A
B2
x0
′
A
B1
x0
A
B0
x0
B−1
the positive direction,
then their sum B1 +B′
1
is deformable to B2 ,
linking A twice. Simi-
larly, B1 + B−1 can be
deformed to the loop
B0 , unlinked from A.
More generally, we see
that Bm + Bn can be
deformed to Bm+n for
arbitrary integers m and n.
Note that in forming sums of loops we produce loops that pass through the base-
point more than once. This is one reason why loops are deﬁned merely as continuous

The Idea of the Fundamental Group
23
paths, which are allowed to pass through the same point many times. So if one is
thinking of a loop as something made of stretchable string, one has to give the string
the magical power of being able to pass through itself unharmed. However, we must
be sure not to allow our loops to intersect the ﬁxed circle A at any time, otherwise we
could always unlink them from A.
Next we consider a slightly more complicated sort of linking, involving three cir-
cles forming a conﬁguration known as the Borromean rings, shown at the left in the ﬁg-
ure below. The interesting feature here is that if any one of the three circles is removed,
the other two are not
linked.
In the same
A
A
B
B
C
C
spirit as before, let us
regard one of the cir-
cles, say C , as a loop
in the complement of
the other two, A and
B , and we ask whether C can be continuously deformed to unlink it completely from
A and B , always staying in the complement of A and B during the deformation. We
can redraw the picture by pulling A and B apart, dragging C along, and then we see
C winding back and forth between A and B as shown in the second ﬁgure above.
In this new position, if we start at the point of C indicated by the dot and proceed
in the direction given by the arrow, then we pass in sequence: (1) forward through
A, (2) forward through B , (3) backward through A, and (4) backward through B . If
we measure the linking of C with A and B by two integers, then the ‘forwards’ and
‘backwards’ cancel and both integers are zero. This reﬂects the fact that C is not
linked with A or B individually.
To get a more accurate measure of how C links with A and B together, we re-
gard the four parts (1)–(4) of C as an ordered sequence.
Taking into account the
directions in which these segments of C pass
through A and B , we may deform C to the sum
a + b −a −b of four loops as in the ﬁgure. We
A
B
a
b
−b
−a
A
B
a
b
−b
−a
write the third and fourth loops as the nega-
tives of the ﬁrst two since they can be deformed
to the ﬁrst two, but with the opposite orienta-
tions, and as we saw in the preceding exam-
ple, the sum of two oppositely oriented loops
is deformable to a trivial loop, not linked with
anything. We would like to view the expression
a + b −a −b as lying in a nonabelian group, so that it is not automatically zero.
Changing to the more usual multiplicative notation for nonabelian groups, it would
be written aba−1b−1 , the commutator of a and b.

24
Chapter 1
The Fundamental Group
To shed further light on this example, suppose we modify it slightly so that the cir-
cles A and B are now linked, as in the next ﬁgure. The circle C can then be deformed
A
B
C
A
B
C
into the position shown at
the right, where it again rep-
resents the composite loop
aba−1b−1 , where a and b
are loops linking A and B .
But from the picture on the
left it is apparent that C can
actually be unlinked completely from A and B . So in this case the product aba−1b−1
should be trivial.
The fundamental group of a space X will be deﬁned so that its elements are
loops in X starting and ending at a ﬁxed basepoint x0 ∈X , but two such loops
are regarded as determining the same element of the fundamental group if one loop
can be continuously deformed to the other within the space X . (All loops that occur
during deformations must also start and end at x0 .) In the ﬁrst example above, X is
the complement of the circle A, while in the other two examples X is the complement
of the two circles A and B . In the second section in this chapter we will show:
The fundamental group of the complement of the circle A in the ﬁrst example is
inﬁnite cyclic with the loop B as a generator. This amounts to saying that every
loop in the complement of A can be deformed to one of the loops Bn , and that
Bn cannot be deformed to Bm if n ≠m.
The fundamental group of the complement of the two unlinked circles A and B in
the second example is the nonabelian free group on two generators, represented
by the loops a and b linking A and B . In particular, the commutator aba−1b−1
is a nontrivial element of this group.
The fundamental group of the complement of the two linked circles A and B in
the third example is the free abelian group on two generators, represented by the
loops a and b linking A and B .
As a result of these calculations, we have two ways to tell when a pair of circles A
and B is linked. The direct approach is given by the ﬁrst example, where one circle
is regarded as an element of the fundamental group of the complement of the other
circle. An alternative and somewhat more subtle method is given by the second and
third examples, where one distinguishes a pair of linked circles from a pair of unlinked
circles by the fundamental group of their complement, which is abelian in one case and
nonabelian in the other. This method is much more general: One can often show that
two spaces are not homeomorphic by showing that their fundamental groups are not
isomorphic, since it will be an easy consequence of the deﬁnition of the fundamental
group that homeomorphic spaces have isomorphic fundamental groups.

Basic Constructions
Section 1.1
25
This ﬁrst section begins with the basic deﬁnitions and constructions, and then
proceeds quickly to an important calculation, the fundamental group of the circle,
using notions developed more fully in §1.3. More systematic methods of calculation
are given in §1.2. These are sufﬁcient to show for example that every group is realized
as the fundamental group of some space. This idea is exploited in the Additional
Topics at the end of the chapter, which give some illustrations of how algebraic facts
about groups can be derived topologically, such as the fact that every subgroup of a
free group is free.
Paths and Homotopy
The fundamental group will be deﬁned in terms of loops and deformations of
loops. Sometimes it will be useful to consider more generally paths and their defor-
mations, so we begin with this slight extra generality.
By a path in a space X we mean a continuous map f : I→X where I is the unit
interval [0, 1].
The idea of continuously deforming a path, keeping its endpoints
ﬁxed, is made precise by the following deﬁnition. A homotopy of paths in X is a
family ft : I→X , 0 ≤t ≤1, such that
(1) The endpoints ft(0) = x0 and ft(1) = x1
are independent of t .
x1
1
x0
0
f
f
(2) The associated map F : I×I→X deﬁned by
F(s, t) = ft(s) is continuous.
When two paths f0 and f1 are connected in this way by a homotopy ft , they are said
to be homotopic. The notation for this is f0 ≃f1 .
Example 1.1: Linear Homotopies. Any two paths f0 and f1 in Rn having the same
endpoints x0 and x1 are homotopic via the homotopy ft(s) = (1 −t)f0(s) + tf1(s).
During this homotopy each point f0(s) travels along the line segment to f1(s) at con-
stant speed. This is because the line through f0(s) and f1(s) is linearly parametrized
as f0(s) + t[f1(s) −f0(s)] = (1 −t)f0(s) + tf1(s), with the segment from f0(s) to
f1(s) covered by t values in the interval from 0 to 1. If f1(s) happens to equal f0(s)
then this segment degenerates to a point and ft(s) = f0(s) for all t . This occurs in
particular for s = 0 and s = 1, so each ft is a path from x0 to x1 . Continuity of
the homotopy ft as a map I×I→Rn follows from continuity of f0 and f1 since the
algebraic operations of vector addition and scalar multiplication in the formula for ft
are continuous.
This construction shows more generally that for a convex subspace X ⊂Rn , all
paths in X with given endpoints x0 and x1 are homotopic, since if f0 and f1 lie in
X then so does the homotopy ft .
