[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 1. The Fundamental Group
현재 소단원: 1.2 Van Kampen's Theorem
직전 소단원: 「1.1.ex Exercises」
[본문]
40
Chapter 1
The Fundamental Group
20. Suppose ft : X→X is a homotopy such that f0 and f1 are each the identity map.
Use Lemma 1.19 to show that for any x0 ∈X , the loop ft(x0) represents an element of
the center of π1(X, x0). [One can interpret the result as saying that a loop represents
an element of the center of π1(X) if it extends to a loop of maps X→X .]
The van Kampen theorem gives a method for computing the fundamental groups
of spaces that can be decomposed into simpler spaces whose fundamental groups are
already known. By systematic use of this theorem one can compute the fundamental
groups of a very large number of spaces. We shall see for example that for every group
G there is a space XG whose fundamental group is isomorphic to G.
To give some idea of how one might hope to compute fundamental groups by
decomposing spaces into simpler pieces, let us look at an example.
Consider the
space X formed by two circles A and B intersecting in a single point, which we
choose as the basepoint x0 . By our preceding calculations we know that π1(A) is
inﬁnite cyclic, generated by a loop a that goes once around A.
Similarly, π1(B) is a copy of Z generated by a loop b going
b
a
once around B . Each product of powers of a and b then gives
an element of π1(X). For example, the product a5b2a−3ba2 is the loop that goes
ﬁve times around A, then twice around B , then three times around A in the opposite
direction, then once around B , then twice around A. The set of all words like this
consisting of powers of a alternating with powers of b forms a group usually denoted
Z ∗Z. Multiplication in this group is deﬁned just as one would expect, for example
(b4a5b2a−3)(a4b−1ab3) = b4a5b2ab−1ab3 . The identity element is the empty word,
and inverses are what they have to be, for example (ab2a−3b−4)−1 = b4a3b−2a−1 .
It would be very nice if such words in a and b corresponded exactly to elements of
π1(X), so that π1(X) was isomorphic to the group Z ∗Z. The van Kampen theorem
will imply that this is indeed the case.
Similarly, if X is the union of three circles touching at a single point, the van
Kampen theorem will imply that π1(X) is Z ∗Z ∗Z, the group consisting of words
in powers of three letters a, b, c . The generalization to a union of any number of
circles touching at one point will also follow.
The group Z ∗Z is an example of a general construction called the free product
of groups. The statement of van Kampen’s theorem will be in terms of free products,
so before stating the theorem we will make an algebraic digression to describe the
construction of free products in some detail.

Van Kampen’s Theorem
Section 1.2
41
Free Products of Groups
Suppose one is given a collection of groups Gα and one wishes to construct a
single group containing all these groups as subgroups. One way to do this would be
to take the product group
Q
αGα , whose elements can be regarded as the functions
α , gα ∈Gα . Or one could restrict to functions taking on nonidentity values at
most ﬁnitely often, forming the direct sum
L
α Gα . Both these constructions produce
groups containing all the Gα ’s as subgroups, but with the property that elements of
different subgroups Gα commute with each other. In the realm of nonabelian groups
this commutativity is unnatural, and so one would like a ‘nonabelian’ version of
Q
αGα
or
L
α Gα . Since the sum
L
α Gα is smaller and presumably simpler than
Q
αGα , it
should be easier to construct a nonabelian version of
L
α Gα , and this is what the free
product ∗α Gα achieves.
Here is the precise deﬁnition. As a set, the free product ∗α Gα consists of all
words g1g2 ··· gm of arbitrary ﬁnite length m ≥0, where each letter gi belongs to
a group Gαi and is not the identity element of Gαi , and adjacent letters gi and gi+1
belong to different groups Gα , that is, αi ≠αi+1 . Words satisfying these conditions
are called reduced, the idea being that unreduced words can always be simpliﬁed to
reduced words by writing adjacent letters that lie in the same Gαi as a single letter and
by canceling trivial letters. The empty word is allowed, and will be the identity element
of ∗α Gα . The group operation in ∗α Gα is juxtaposition, (g1 ··· gm)(h1 ··· hn) =
g1 ··· gmh1 ··· hn . This product may not be reduced, however: If gm and h1 belong
to the same Gα , they should be combined into a single letter (gmh1) according to the
multiplication in Gα , and if this new letter gmh1 happens to be the identity of Gα , it
should be canceled from the product. This may allow gm−1 and h2 to be combined,
and possibly canceled too. Repetition of this process eventually produces a reduced
word. For example, in the product (g1 ··· gm)(g−1
m ··· g−1
1 ) everything cancels and
we get the identity element of ∗α Gα , the empty word.
Verifying directly that this multiplication is associative would be rather tedious,
but there is an indirect approach that avoids most of the work. Let W be the set of
reduced words g1 ··· gm as above, including the empty word. To each g ∈Gα we
associate the function Lg : W→W given by multiplication on the left, Lg(g1 ··· gm) =
gg1 ··· gm where we combine g with g1 if g1 ∈Gα to make gg1 ··· gm a reduced
word. A key property of the association g , Lg is the formula Lgg′ = LgLg′ for
g, g′ ∈Gα , that is, g(g′(g1 ··· gm)) = (gg′)(g1 ··· gm). This special case of asso-
ciativity follows rather trivially from associativity in Gα . The formula Lgg′ = LgLg′
implies that Lg is invertible with inverse Lg−1 . Therefore the association g , Lg de-
ﬁnes a homomorphism from Gα to the group P(W) of all permutations of W . More
generally, we can deﬁne L : W→P(W) by L(g1 ··· gm) = Lg1 ··· Lgm for each reduced
word g1 ··· gm . This function L is injective since the permutation L(g1 ··· gm) sends
the empty word to g1 ··· gm . The product operation in W corresponds under L to
