[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 1. The Fundamental Group
현재 소단원: 1.2.1 Free Products of Groups
직전 소단원: 「1.2 Van Kampen's Theorem」
[본문]
Van Kampen’s Theorem
Section 1.2
41
Free Products of Groups
Suppose one is given a collection of groups Gα and one wishes to construct a
single group containing all these groups as subgroups. One way to do this would be
to take the product group
Q
αGα , whose elements can be regarded as the functions
α , gα ∈Gα . Or one could restrict to functions taking on nonidentity values at
most ﬁnitely often, forming the direct sum
L
α Gα . Both these constructions produce
groups containing all the Gα ’s as subgroups, but with the property that elements of
different subgroups Gα commute with each other. In the realm of nonabelian groups
this commutativity is unnatural, and so one would like a ‘nonabelian’ version of
Q
αGα
or
L
α Gα . Since the sum
L
α Gα is smaller and presumably simpler than
Q
αGα , it
should be easier to construct a nonabelian version of
L
α Gα , and this is what the free
product ∗α Gα achieves.
Here is the precise deﬁnition. As a set, the free product ∗α Gα consists of all
words g1g2 ··· gm of arbitrary ﬁnite length m ≥0, where each letter gi belongs to
a group Gαi and is not the identity element of Gαi , and adjacent letters gi and gi+1
belong to different groups Gα , that is, αi ≠αi+1 . Words satisfying these conditions
are called reduced, the idea being that unreduced words can always be simpliﬁed to
reduced words by writing adjacent letters that lie in the same Gαi as a single letter and
by canceling trivial letters. The empty word is allowed, and will be the identity element
of ∗α Gα . The group operation in ∗α Gα is juxtaposition, (g1 ··· gm)(h1 ··· hn) =
g1 ··· gmh1 ··· hn . This product may not be reduced, however: If gm and h1 belong
to the same Gα , they should be combined into a single letter (gmh1) according to the
multiplication in Gα , and if this new letter gmh1 happens to be the identity of Gα , it
should be canceled from the product. This may allow gm−1 and h2 to be combined,
and possibly canceled too. Repetition of this process eventually produces a reduced
word. For example, in the product (g1 ··· gm)(g−1
m ··· g−1
1 ) everything cancels and
we get the identity element of ∗α Gα , the empty word.
Verifying directly that this multiplication is associative would be rather tedious,
but there is an indirect approach that avoids most of the work. Let W be the set of
reduced words g1 ··· gm as above, including the empty word. To each g ∈Gα we
associate the function Lg : W→W given by multiplication on the left, Lg(g1 ··· gm) =
gg1 ··· gm where we combine g with g1 if g1 ∈Gα to make gg1 ··· gm a reduced
word. A key property of the association g , Lg is the formula Lgg′ = LgLg′ for
g, g′ ∈Gα , that is, g(g′(g1 ··· gm)) = (gg′)(g1 ··· gm). This special case of asso-
ciativity follows rather trivially from associativity in Gα . The formula Lgg′ = LgLg′
implies that Lg is invertible with inverse Lg−1 . Therefore the association g , Lg de-
ﬁnes a homomorphism from Gα to the group P(W) of all permutations of W . More
generally, we can deﬁne L : W→P(W) by L(g1 ··· gm) = Lg1 ··· Lgm for each reduced
word g1 ··· gm . This function L is injective since the permutation L(g1 ··· gm) sends
the empty word to g1 ··· gm . The product operation in W corresponds under L to

42
Chapter 1
The Fundamental Group
composition in P(W), because of the relation Lgg′ = LgLg′ . Since composition in
P(W) is associative, we conclude that the product in W is associative.
In particular, we have the free product Z ∗Z as described earlier.
This is an
example of a free group, the free product of any number of copies of Z, ﬁnite or
inﬁnite. The elements of a free group are uniquely representable as reduced words in
powers of generators for the various copies of Z, with one generator for each Z, just
as in the case of Z ∗Z. These generators are called a basis for the free group, and the
number of basis elements is the rank of the free group. The abelianization of a free
group is a free abelian group with basis the same set of generators, so since the rank
of a free abelian group is well-deﬁned, independent of the choice of basis, the same
is true for the rank of a free group.
An interesting example of a free product that is not a free group is Z2 ∗Z2 . This
is like Z∗Z but simpler since a2 = e = b2 , so powers of a and b are not needed, and
Z2 ∗Z2 consists of just the alternating words in a and b: a, b, ab, ba, aba, bab,
abab, baba, ababa, ···, together with the empty word. The structure of Z2 ∗Z2
can be elucidated by looking at the homomorphism ϕ : Z2 ∗Z2→Z2 associating to
each word its length mod 2. Obviously ϕ is surjective, and its kernel consists of the
words of even length. These form an inﬁnite cyclic subgroup generated by ab since
ba = (ab)−1 in Z2 ∗Z2 . In fact, Z2 ∗Z2 is the semi-direct product of the subgroups
Z and Z2 generated by ab and a, with the conjugation relation a(ab)a−1 = (ab)−1 .
This group is sometimes called the inﬁnite dihedral group.
For a general free product ∗α Gα , each group Gα is naturally identiﬁed with a
subgroup of ∗α Gα , the subgroup consisting of the empty word and the nonidentity
one-letter words g ∈Gα . From this viewpoint the empty word is the common iden-
tity element of all the subgroups Gα , which are otherwise disjoint. A consequence
of associativity is that any product g1 ··· gm of elements gi in the groups Gα has a
unique reduced form, the element of ∗α Gα obtained by performing the multiplica-
tions in any order. Any sequence of reduction operations on an unreduced product
g1 ··· gm , combining adjacent letters gi and gi+1 that lie in the same Gα or canceling
a gi that is the identity, can be viewed as a way of inserting parentheses into g1 ··· gm
and performing the resulting sequence of multiplications. Thus associativity implies
that any two sequences of reduction operations performed on the same unreduced
word always yield the same reduced word.
A basic property of the free product ∗α Gα is that any collection of homomor-
phisms ϕα : Gα→H extends uniquely to a homomorphism ϕ : ∗α Gα→H . Namely,
the value of ϕ on a word g1 ··· gn with gi ∈Gαi must be ϕα1(g1) ··· ϕαn(gn), and
using this formula to deﬁne ϕ gives a well-deﬁned homomorphism since the process
of reducing an unreduced product in ∗α Gα does not affect its image under ϕ. For
example, for a free product G ∗H the inclusions G > G×H and H > G×H induce
a surjective homomorphism G ∗H→G×H .

Van Kampen’s Theorem
Section 1.2
43
The van Kampen Theorem
Suppose a space X is decomposed as the union of a collection of path-connected
open subsets Aα , each of which contains the basepoint x0 ∈X . By the remarks in the
preceding paragraph, the homomorphisms jα : π1(Aα)→π1(X) induced by the inclu-
sions Aα > X extend to a homomorphism Φ : ∗α π1(Aα)→π1(X). The van Kampen
theorem will say that Φ is very often surjective, but we can expect Φ to have a nontriv-
ial kernel in general. For if iαβ : π1(Aα ∩Aβ)→π1(Aα) is the homomorphism induced
by the inclusion Aα ∩Aβ > Aα then jαiαβ = jβiβα , both these compositions being
induced by the inclusion Aα ∩Aβ > X , so the kernel of Φ contains all the elements
of the form iαβ(ω)iβα(ω)−1 for ω ∈π1(Aα ∩Aβ). Van Kampen’s theorem asserts
that under fairly broad hypotheses this gives a full description of Φ:
Theorem 1.20. If X is the union of path-connected open sets Aα each containing
the basepoint x0 ∈X and if each intersection Aα ∩Aβ is path-connected, then the
homomorphism Φ : ∗α π1(Aα)→π1(X) is surjective. If in addition each intersection
Aα∩Aβ∩Aγ is path-connected, then the kernel of Φ is the normal subgroup N gener-
ated by all elements of the form iαβ(ω)iβα(ω)−1 , and so Φ induces an isomorphism
π1(X) ≈∗α π1(Aα)/N .
Example 1.21: Wedge Sums. In Chapter 0 we deﬁned the wedge sum
W
α Xα of a
collection of spaces Xα with basepoints xα ∈Xα to be the quotient space of the
disjoint union
`
α Xα in which all the basepoints xα are identiﬁed to a single point.
If each xα is a deformation retract of an open neighborhood Uα in Xα , then Xα is
a deformation retract of its open neighborhood Aα = Xα
W
β≠α Uβ . The intersection
of two or more distinct Aα ’s is
W
α Uα , which deformation retracts to a point. Van
Kampen’s theorem then implies that Φ : ∗α π1(Xα)→π1(
W
α Xα) is an isomorphism.
Thus for a wedge sum
W
α S1
α of circles, π1(
W
α S1
α) is a free group, the free product
of copies of Z, one for each circle S1
α . In particular, π1(S1∨S1) is the free group Z∗Z,
as in the example at the beginning of this section.
It is true more generally that the fundamental group of any connected graph is
free, as we show in §1.A. Here is an example illustrating the general technique.
Example 1.22. Let X be the graph shown in the ﬁgure, consist-
ing of the twelve edges of a cube. The seven heavily shaded edges
form a maximal tree T ⊂X , a contractible subgraph containing all
the vertices of X . We claim that π1(X) is the free product of ﬁve
copies of Z, one for each edge not in T . To deduce this from van
Kampen’s theorem, choose for each edge eα of X −T an open neighborhood Aα of
T ∪eα in X that deformation retracts onto T ∪eα . The intersection of two or more
Aα ’s deformation retracts onto T , hence is contractible. The Aα ’s form a cover of
X satisfying the hypotheses of van Kampen’s theorem, and since the intersection of
