[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 1. The Fundamental Group
현재 소단원: 1.2.2 The van Kampen Theorem (분할 part 2)
직전 소단원: 「1.2.1 Free Products of Groups」
[본문]
50
Chapter 1
The Fundamental Group
On the other hand, the fundamental group of a wedge sum of countably many circles
is countably generated, hence countable.
The group π1(X) is actually far more complicated than
Q
∞Z. For one thing,
it is nonabelian, since the retraction X→C1 ∪··· ∪Cn that collapses all the circles
smaller than Cn to the basepoint induces a surjection from π1(X) to a free group on
n generators. For a complete description of π1(X) see [Cannon & Conner 2000].
It is a theorem of [Shelah 1988] that for a path-connected, locally path-connected
compact metric space X , π1(X) is either ﬁnitely generated or uncountable.
Applications to Cell Complexes
For the remainder of this section we shall be interested in 2 dimensional cell
complexes, analyzing how the fundamental group is affected by attaching 2 cells.
According to an exercise at the end of this section, attaching cells of higher dimension
has no effect on π1 , so all the interest lies in how the 2 cells are attached.
Suppose we attach a collection of 2 cells e2
α to a path-connected space X via maps
ϕα : S1→X , producing a space Y . If s0 is a basepoint of S1 then ϕα determines a loop
at ϕα(s0) that we shall call ϕα , even though technically loops are maps I→X rather
than S1→X . For different α’s the basepoints ϕα(s0) of these loops ϕα may not all
coincide. To remedy this, choose a basepoint x0 ∈X and a path γα in X from x0 to
ϕα(s0) for each α. Then γαϕαγα is a loop at x0 . This loop may not be nullhomotopic
in X , but it will certainly be nullhomotopic after the cell e2
α is attached. Thus the
normal subgroup N ⊂π1(X, x0) generated by all the loops γαϕαγα for varying α
lies in the kernel of the map π1(X, x0)→π1(Y, x0) induced by the inclusion X > Y .
Proposition 1.26. The inclusion X > Y induces a surjection π1(X, x0)→π1(Y, x0)
whose kernel is N . Thus π1(Y) ≈π1(X)/N .
It follows that N is independent of the choice of the paths γα , but this can also be
seen directly: If we replace γα by another path ηα having the same endpoints, then
γαϕαγα changes to ηαϕαηα = (ηαγα)γαϕαγα(γαηα), so γαϕαγα and ηαϕαηα
deﬁne conjugate elements of π1(X, x0).
Proof: Let us expand Y to a slightly larger space Z that deformation retracts onto Y
and is more convenient for applying van Kampen’s theorem. The space Z is obtained
from Y by attaching rectangular strips Sα = I×I , with the lower edge I×{0} attached
along γα , the right edge {1}×I attached
along an arc in e2
α , and all the left edges
{0}×I of the different strips identiﬁed
together. The top edges of the strips are
S
X
e
x
y
2
0
α
α
α 
α
γ
not attached to anything, and this allows
us to deformation retract Z onto Y .
