[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 1. The Fundamental Group
현재 소단원: 1.2.3 Applications to Cell Complexes
직전 소단원: 「1.2.2 The van Kampen Theorem」
[본문]
50
Chapter 1
The Fundamental Group
On the other hand, the fundamental group of a wedge sum of countably many circles
is countably generated, hence countable.
The group π1(X) is actually far more complicated than
Q
∞Z. For one thing,
it is nonabelian, since the retraction X→C1 ∪··· ∪Cn that collapses all the circles
smaller than Cn to the basepoint induces a surjection from π1(X) to a free group on
n generators. For a complete description of π1(X) see [Cannon & Conner 2000].
It is a theorem of [Shelah 1988] that for a path-connected, locally path-connected
compact metric space X , π1(X) is either ﬁnitely generated or uncountable.
Applications to Cell Complexes
For the remainder of this section we shall be interested in 2 dimensional cell
complexes, analyzing how the fundamental group is affected by attaching 2 cells.
According to an exercise at the end of this section, attaching cells of higher dimension
has no effect on π1 , so all the interest lies in how the 2 cells are attached.
Suppose we attach a collection of 2 cells e2
α to a path-connected space X via maps
ϕα : S1→X , producing a space Y . If s0 is a basepoint of S1 then ϕα determines a loop
at ϕα(s0) that we shall call ϕα , even though technically loops are maps I→X rather
than S1→X . For different α’s the basepoints ϕα(s0) of these loops ϕα may not all
coincide. To remedy this, choose a basepoint x0 ∈X and a path γα in X from x0 to
ϕα(s0) for each α. Then γαϕαγα is a loop at x0 . This loop may not be nullhomotopic
in X , but it will certainly be nullhomotopic after the cell e2
α is attached. Thus the
normal subgroup N ⊂π1(X, x0) generated by all the loops γαϕαγα for varying α
lies in the kernel of the map π1(X, x0)→π1(Y, x0) induced by the inclusion X > Y .
Proposition 1.26. The inclusion X > Y induces a surjection π1(X, x0)→π1(Y, x0)
whose kernel is N . Thus π1(Y) ≈π1(X)/N .
It follows that N is independent of the choice of the paths γα , but this can also be
seen directly: If we replace γα by another path ηα having the same endpoints, then
γαϕαγα changes to ηαϕαηα = (ηαγα)γαϕαγα(γαηα), so γαϕαγα and ηαϕαηα
deﬁne conjugate elements of π1(X, x0).
Proof: Let us expand Y to a slightly larger space Z that deformation retracts onto Y
and is more convenient for applying van Kampen’s theorem. The space Z is obtained
from Y by attaching rectangular strips Sα = I×I , with the lower edge I×{0} attached
along γα , the right edge {1}×I attached
along an arc in e2
α , and all the left edges
{0}×I of the different strips identiﬁed
together. The top edges of the strips are
S
X
e
x
y
2
0
α
α
α 
α
γ
not attached to anything, and this allows
us to deformation retract Z onto Y .

Van Kampen’s Theorem
Section 1.2
51
In each cell e2
α choose a point yα not in the arc along which Sα is attached. Let
A = Z −
S
α{yα} and let B = Z −X . Then A deformation retracts onto X , and B is
contractible. Since π1(B) = 0, van Kampen’s theorem applied to the cover {A, B} says
that π1(Z) is isomorphic to the quotient of π1(A) by the normal subgroup generated
by the image of the map π1(A ∩B)→π1(A). So it remains only to see that π1(A ∩B)
is generated by the loops γαϕαγα , or rather by loops in A ∩B homotopic to these
loops. This can be shown by another application of van Kampen’s theorem, this time
to the cover of A ∩B by the open sets Aα = A ∩B −
S
β≠α e2
β . Since Aα deformation
retracts onto a circle in e2
α−{yα}, we have π1(Aα) ≈Z generated by a loop homotopic
to γαϕαγα , and the result follows.
⊔⊓
As a ﬁrst application we compute the fundamental group of the orientable surface
Mg of genus g. This has a cell structure with one 0 cell, 2g 1 cells, and one 2 cell, as
we saw in Chapter 0. The 1 skeleton is a wedge sum of 2g circles, with fundamental
group free on 2g generators.
The 2 cell is attached along the loop given by the
product of the commutators of these generators, say [a1, b1] ··· [ag, bg]. Therefore
π1(Mg) ≈

a1, b1, ··· , ag, bg |||| [a1, b1] ··· [ag, bg]

where

gα |||| rβ

denotes the group with generators gα and relators rβ , in other
words, the free group on the generators gα modulo the normal subgroup generated
by the words rβ in these generators.
Corollary 1.27. The surface Mg is not homeomorphic, or even homotopy equivalent,
to Mh if g ≠h.
Proof: The abelianization of π1(Mg) is the direct sum of 2g copies of Z.
So if
Mg ≃Mh then π1(Mg) ≈π1(Mh), hence the abelianizations of these groups are iso-
morphic, which implies g = h.
⊔⊓
Nonorientable surfaces can be treated in the same way. If we attach a 2 cell to the
wedge sum of g circles by the word a2
1 ··· a2
g we obtain a nonorientable surface Ng .
For example, N1 is the projective plane RP2 , the quotient of D2 with antipodal points
of ∂D2 identiﬁed. And N2 is the Klein bottle, though the more usual representation
a
a
1
N
2
N
a
b
a
b
c
a
a
c
c
b
:
−−−
:
−−−−
of the Klein bottle is as a square with opposite sides identiﬁed via the word aba−1b.
If one cuts the square along a diagonal and reassembles the resulting two triangles
as shown in the ﬁgure, one obtains the other representation as a square with sides

52
Chapter 1
The Fundamental Group
identiﬁed via the word a2c2 . By the proposition, π1(Ng) ≈

a1, ··· , ag |||| a2
1 ··· a2
g

.
This abelianizes to the direct sum of Z2 with g −1 copies of Z since in the abelian-
ization we can rechoose the generators to be a1, ··· , ag−1 and a1 + ··· + ag , with
2(a1 + ··· + ag) = 0. Hence Ng is not homotopy equivalent to Nh if g ≠h, nor is
Ng homotopy equivalent to any orientable surface Mh .
Here is another application of the preceding proposition:
Corollary 1.28. For every group G there is a 2 dimensional cell complex XG with
π1(XG) ≈G.
Proof: Choose a presentation G =

gα |||| rβ

.
This exists since every group is a
quotient of a free group, so the gα ’s can be taken to be the generators of this free
group with the rβ ’s generators of the kernel of the map from the free group to G.
Now construct XG from
W
α S1
α by attaching 2 cells e2
β by the loops speciﬁed by the
words rβ .
⊔⊓
Example 1.29. If G =

a |||| an 
= Zn then XG is S1 with a cell e2 attached by the map
z , zn , thinking of S1 as the unit circle in C. When n = 2 we get XG = RP2 , but for
n > 2 the space XG is not a surface since there are n ‘sheets’ of e2 attached at each
point of the circle S1 ⊂XG . For example, when n = 3 one can construct a neighbor-
hood N of S1 in XG by taking the product of the
graph
with the interval I , and then identifying
the two ends of this product via a one-third twist as
shown in the ﬁgure. The boundary of N consists
of a single circle, formed by the three endpoints of
each
cross section of N . To complete the construction of XG from N one attaches
a disk along the boundary circle of N . This cannot be done in R3 , though it can in
R4 . For n = 4 one would use the graph
instead of
, with a one-quarter twist
instead of a one-third twist. For larger n one would use an n pointed ‘asterisk’ and
a 1/n twist.
Exercises
1. Show that the free product G ∗H of nontrivial groups G and H has trivial center,
and that the only elements of G ∗H of ﬁnite order are the conjugates of ﬁnite-order
elements of G and H .
2. Let X ⊂Rm be the union of convex open sets X1, ··· , Xn such that Xi∩Xj ∩Xk ≠∅
for all i, j, k. Show that X is simply-connected.
3. Show that the complement of a ﬁnite set of points in Rn is simply-connected if
n ≥3.

Van Kampen’s Theorem
Section 1.2
53
4. Let X ⊂R3 be the union of n lines through the origin. Compute π1(R3 −X).
5. Let X ⊂R2 be a connected graph that is the union of a ﬁnite number of straight
line segments. Show that π1(X) is free with a basis consisting of loops formed by
the boundaries of the bounded complementary regions of X , joined to a basepoint by
suitably chosen paths in X . [Assume the Jordan curve theorem for polygonal simple
closed curves, which is equivalent to the case that X is homeomorphic to S1 .]
6. Suppose a space Y is obtained from a path-connected subspace X by attaching
n cells for a ﬁxed n ≥3. Show that the inclusion X > Y induces an isomorphism
on π1 . [See the proof of Proposition 1.26.] Apply this to show that the complement
of a discrete subspace of Rn is simply-connected if n ≥3.
7. Let X be the quotient space of S2 obtained by identifying the north and south
poles to a single point. Put a cell complex structure on X and use this to compute
π1(X).
8. Compute the fundamental group of the space obtained from two tori S1×S1 by
identifying a circle S1×{x0} in one torus with the corresponding circle S1×{x0} in
the other torus.
9. In the surface Mg of genus g, let
C be a circle that separates Mg into
two compact subsurfaces M′
h and M′
k
obtained from the closed surfaces Mh
′
M
C
C
h
′
′
Mk
and Mk by deleting an open disk from
each. Show that M′
h does not retract onto its boundary circle C , and hence Mg does
not retract onto C . [Hint: abelianize π1 .] But show that Mg does retract onto the
nonseparating circle C′ in the ﬁgure.
α
β
γ
10.
Consider two arcs α and β embedded in D2×I as
shown in the ﬁgure. The loop γ is obviously nullhomotopic
in D2×I , but show that there is no nullhomotopy of γ in
the complement of α ∪β.
11.
The mapping torus Tf of a map f : X→X is the quotient of X×I obtained
by identifying each point (x, 0) with (f (x), 1).
In the case X = S1 ∨S1 with f
basepoint-preserving, compute a presentation for π1(Tf ) in terms of the induced
map f∗: π1(X)→π1(X). Do the same when X = S1×S1 . [One way to do this is to
regard Tf as built from X ∨S1 by attaching cells.]
12. The Klein bottle is usually pictured as a sub-
space of R3 like the subspace X ⊂R3 shown in
the ﬁrst ﬁgure at the right. If one wanted a model
that could actually function as a bottle, one would
delete the open disk bounded by the circle of self-
intersection of X , producing a subspace Y ⊂X . Show that π1(X) ≈Z ∗Z and that

54
Chapter 1
The Fundamental Group
π1(Y) has the presentation

a, b, c |||| aba−1b−1cbεc−1 
for ε = ±1. (Changing the
sign of ε gives an isomorphic group, as it happens.) Show also that π1(Y) is isomor-
phic to π1(R3−Z) for Z the graph shown in the ﬁgure. The groups π1(X) and π1(Y)
are not isomorphic, but this is not easy to prove; see the discussion in Example 1B.13.
13. The space Y in the preceding exercise can be obtained from a disk with two holes
by identifying its three boundary circles. There are only two essentially different ways
of identifying the three boundary circles. Show that the other way yields a space Z
with π1(Z) not isomorphic to π1(Y). [Abelianize the fundamental groups to show
they are not isomorphic.]
14. Consider the quotient space of a cube I3 obtained by identifying each square
face with the opposite square face via the right-handed screw motion consisting of
a translation by one unit in the direction perpendicular to the face combined with a
one-quarter twist of the face about its center point. Show this quotient space X is a
cell complex with two 0 cells, four 1 cells, three 2 cells, and one 3 cell. Using this
structure, show that π1(X) is the quaternion group {±1, ±i, ±j, ±k}, of order eight.
15. Given a space X with basepoint x0 ∈X , we may construct a CW complex L(X)
having a single 0 cell, a 1 cell e1
γ for each loop γ in X based at x0 , and a 2 cell e2
τ
for each map τ of a standard triangle PQR into X taking the three vertices P , Q,
and R of the triangle to x0 . The 2 cell e2
τ is attached to the three 1 cells that are the
loops obtained by restricting τ to the three oriented edges PQ, PR, and QR. Show
that the natural map L(X)→X induces an isomorphism π1
 L(X)

≈π1(X, x0).
16. Show that the fundamental group of the surface of inﬁnite genus shown below is
free on an inﬁnite number of generators.
17. Show that π1(R2 −Q2) is uncountable.
18. In this problem we use the notions of suspension, reduced suspension, cone, and
mapping cone deﬁned in Chapter 0. Let X be the subspace of R consisting of the
sequence 1, 1/2, 1/3, 1/4, ··· together with its limit point 0.
(a) For the suspension SX , show that π1(SX) is free on a countably inﬁnite set of
generators, and deduce that π1(SX) is countable. In contrast to this, the reduced
suspension ΣX , obtained from SX by collapsing the segment {0}×I to a point, is
the shrinking wedge of circles in Example 1.25, with an uncountable fundamental
group.
(b) Let C be the mapping cone of the quotient map SX→ΣX . Show that π1(C) is un-
countable by constructing a homomorphism from π1(C) onto
Q
∞Z/
L
∞Z. Note

Van Kampen’s Theorem
Section 1.2
55
that C is the reduced suspension of the cone CX . Thus the reduced suspension
of a contractible space need not be contractible, unlike the unreduced suspension.
19. Show that the subspace of R3 that is the union of the spheres of radius 1/n and
center (1/n, 0, 0) for n = 1, 2, ··· is simply-connected.
20. Let X be the subspace of R2 that is the union of the circles Cn of radius n and
center (n, 0) for n = 1, 2, ···. Show that π1(X) is the free group ∗n π1(Cn), the same
as for the inﬁnite wedge sum
W
∞S1 . Show that X and
W
∞S1 are in fact homotopy
equivalent, but not homeomorphic.
21. Show that the join X ∗Y of two nonempty spaces X and Y is simply-connected
if X is path-connected.
22. In this exercise we describe an algorithm for computing a presentation of the
fundamental group of the complement of a smooth or piecewise linear knot K in R3 ,
called the Wirtinger presentation. To begin, we position the knot to lie almost ﬂat on
a table, so that K consists of ﬁnitely many disjoint arcs αi where it intersects the
table top together with ﬁnitely many disjoint arcs βℓwhere K crosses over itself.
The conﬁguration at such a crossing is shown in the ﬁrst ﬁgure below. We build a
α
β
T
Ri
Rk
S
Rj
i
αj
αk
ℓ
ℓ
Ri
Rk
Rj
2 dimensional complex X that is a deformation retract of R3 −K by the following
three steps. First, start with the rectangle T formed by the table top. Next, just above
each arc αi place a long, thin rectangular strip Ri , curved to run parallel to αi along
the full length of αi and arched so that the two long edges of Ri are identiﬁed with
points of T , as in the second ﬁgure. Any arcs βℓthat cross over αi are positioned
to lie in Ri . Finally, over each arc βℓput a square Sℓ, bent downward along its four
edges so that these edges are identiﬁed with points of three strips Ri , Rj , and Rk as
in the third ﬁgure; namely, two opposite edges of Sℓare identiﬁed with short edges
of Rj and Rk and the other two opposite edges of Sℓare identiﬁed with two arcs
crossing the interior of Ri . The knot K is now a subspace of X , but after we lift K up
slightly into the complement of X , it becomes evident that X is a deformation retract
of R3 −K .
(a) Assuming this bit of geometry, show that π1(R3 −K) has a presentation with one
generator xi for each strip Ri and one relation of the form xixjx−1
i
= xk for
each square Sℓ, where the indices are as in the ﬁgures above. [To get the correct
signs it is helpful to use an orientation of K .]
(b) Use this presentation to show that the abelianization of π1(R3 −K) is Z.

56
Chapter 1
The Fundamental Group
We come now to the second main topic of this chapter, covering spaces.
We
have in fact already encountered one example of a covering space in our calculation
of π1(S1). This was the map R→S1 that we pictured as the projection of a helix
onto a circle, with the helix lying above the circle, ‘covering’ it. A number of things
we proved for this covering space are valid for all covering spaces, and this allows
covering spaces to serve as a useful general tool for calculating fundamental groups.
But the connection between the fundamental group and covering spaces runs much
deeper than this, and in many ways they can be regarded as two viewpoints toward the
same thing. This means that algebraic features of the fundamental group can often
be translated into the geometric language of covering spaces.
This is exempliﬁed
in one of the main results in this section, giving an exact correspondence between
the various connected covering spaces of a given space X and subgroups of π1(X).
This is strikingly reminiscent of Galois theory, with its correspondence between ﬁeld
extensions and subgroups of the Galois group.
Let us begin with the deﬁnition. A covering space of a space X is a space eX
together with a map p : eX→X satisfying the following condition: There exists an
open cover {Uα} of X such that for each α, p−1(Uα) is a disjoint union of open sets
in eX , each of which is mapped by p homeomorphically onto Uα . We do not require
p−1(Uα) to be nonempty, so p need not be surjective.
In the helix example one has p : R→S1 given by p(t) = (cos 2πt, sin 2πt), and
the cover {Uα} can be taken to consist of any two open arcs whose union is S1 .
A related example is the helicoid surface S ⊂R3 consisting of points of the form
(s cos 2πt, s sin 2πt, t) for (s, t) ∈(0, ∞)×R. This projects onto R2 −{0} via the
map (x, y, z), (x, y), and this projection deﬁnes a covering space p : S→R2 −{0}
since for each open disk U in R2 −{0}, p−1(U) consists of countably many disjoint
open disks in S , each mapped homeomorphically onto U by p.
p
Another example is the map p : S1→S1 , p(z) = zn where we
view z as a complex number with |z| = 1 and n is any positive
integer. The closest one can come to realizing this covering space
as a linear projection in 3 space analogous to the projection of the
helix is to draw a circle wrapping around a cylinder n times and
intersecting itself in n −1 points that one has to imagine are not
really intersections. For an alternative picture without this defect,
embed S1 in the boundary torus of a solid torus S1×D2 so that it winds n times
monotonically around the S1 factor without self-intersections, then restrict the pro-
jection S1×D2→S1×{0} to this embedded circle. The ﬁgure for Example 1.29 in the
preceding section illustrates the case n = 3.
