[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 1. The Fundamental Group
현재 소단원: 1.3.2 The Classification of Covering Spaces (분할 part 2)
직전 소단원: 「1.3.1 Lifting Properties」
[본문]
70
Chapter 1
The Fundamental Group
Notice that the deﬁnition of eXρ makes sense whenever we are given an action
ρ of π1(X, x0) on a set F . There is a natural projection eXρ→X sending ([γ], ex0)
to γ(1), and this is a covering space since if U ⊂X is an open set over which the
universal cover eX0 is a product U ×π1(X, x0), then the identiﬁcations deﬁning eXρ
simply collapse U ×π1(X, x0)×F to U ×F .
Returning to our given covering space eX→X with associated action ρ, the map
eXρ→eX induced by h is a bijection and therefore a homeomorphism since h was a
local homeomorphism. Since this homeomorphism eXρ→eX takes each ﬁber of eXρ to
the corresponding ﬁber of eX , it is an isomorphism of covering spaces.
If two covering spaces p1 : eX1→X and p2 : eX2→X are isomorphic, one may ask
how the corresponding actions of π1(X, x0) on the ﬁbers F1 and F2 over x0 are
related. An isomorphism h : eX1→eX2 restricts to a bijection F1→F2 , and evidently
Lγ(h( ex0)) = h(Lγ( ex0)). Using the less cumbersome notation γ ex0 for Lγ( ex0), this
relation can be written more concisely as γh( ex0) = h(γ ex0). A bijection F1→F2 with
this property is what one would naturally call an isomorphism of sets with π1(X, x0)
action.
Thus isomorphic covering spaces have isomorphic actions on ﬁbers.
The
converse is also true, and easy to prove. One just observes that for isomorphic actions
ρ1 and ρ2 , an isomorphism h : F1→F2 induces a map eXρ1→eXρ2 and h−1 induces a
similar map in the opposite direction, such that the compositions of these two maps,
in either order, are the identity.
This shows that n sheeted covering spaces of X are classiﬁed by equivalence
classes of homomorphisms π1(X, x0)→Σn , where Σn is the symmetric group on n
symbols and the equivalence relation identiﬁes a homomorphism ρ with each of its
conjugates h−1ρh by elements h ∈Σn . The study of the various homomorphisms
from a given group to Σn is a very classical topic in group theory, so we see that this
algebraic question has a nice geometric interpretation.
Deck Transformations and Group Actions
For a covering space p : eX→X the isomorphisms eX→eX are called deck transfor-
mations or covering transformations. These form a group G( eX) under composition.
For example, for the covering space p : R→S1 projecting a vertical helix onto a circle,
the deck transformations are the vertical translations taking the helix onto itself, so
G( eX) ≈Z in this case. For the n sheeted covering space S1→S1 , z , zn , the deck
transformations are the rotations of S1 through angles that are multiples of 2π/n,
so G( eX) = Zn .
By the unique lifting property, a deck transformation is completely determined
by where it sends a single point, assuming eX is path-connected. In particular, only
the identity deck transformation can ﬁx a point of eX .
A covering space p : eX→X is called normal if for each x ∈X and each pair of lifts
ex, ex′ of x there is a deck transformation taking ex to ex′. For example, the covering
