[л¬ём„ң л§ҘлқҪ]
мұ…: Algebraic Topology / м Җмһҗ: Allen Hatcher
мұ•н„°: 1. The Fundamental Group
нҳ„мһ¬ мҶҢлӢЁмӣҗ: 1.B K(G,1) Spaces and Graphs of Groups (л¶„н•  part 1)
м§Ғм „ мҶҢлӢЁмӣҗ: гҖҢ1.A Graphs and Free GroupsгҖҚ
[ліёл¬ё]
K(G,1) Spaces and Graphs of Groups
Section 1.B
87
7. If F is a п¬Ғnitely generated free group and N is a nontrivial normal subgroup of
inп¬Ғnite index, show, using covering spaces, that N is not п¬Ғnitely generated.
8. Show that a п¬Ғnitely generated group has only a п¬Ғnite number of subgroups of a
given п¬Ғnite index. [First do the case of free groups, using covering spaces of graphs.
The general case then follows since every group is a quotient group of a free group.]
9. Using covering spaces, show that an index n subgroup H of a group G has at most
n conjugate subgroups gHgвҲ’1 in G. Apply this to show that there exists a normal
subgroup K вҠӮG of п¬Ғnite index with K вҠӮH .
[For the latter statement, consider
the intersection of all the conjugate subgroups gHgвҲ’1 . This is the maximal normal
subgroup of G contained in H .]
10. Let X be the wedge sum of n circles, with its natural graph structure, and let
eXвҶ’X be a covering space with Y вҠӮeX a п¬Ғnite connected subgraph. Show there is
a п¬Ғnite graph Z вҠғY having the same vertices as Y , such that the projection YвҶ’X
extends to a covering space ZвҶ’X .
11. Apply the two preceding problems to show that if F is a п¬Ғnitely generated free
group and x вҲҲF is not the identity element, then there is a normal subgroup H вҠӮF
of п¬Ғnite index such that x вҲүH . Hence x has nontrivial image in a п¬Ғnite quotient
group of F . In this situation one says F is residually п¬Ғnite.
12. Let F be a п¬Ғnitely generated free group, H вҠӮF a п¬Ғnitely generated subgroup, and
x вҲҲF вҲ’H . Show there is a subgroup K of п¬Ғnite index in F such that K вҠғH and
x вҲүK . [Apply Exercise 10.]
13. Let x be a nontrivial element of a п¬Ғnitely generated free group F . Show there is
a п¬Ғnite-index subgroup H вҠӮF in which x is one element of a basis. [Exercises 4 and
10 may be helpful.]
14. Show that the existence of maximal trees is equivalent to the Axiom of Choice.
In this section we introduce a class of spaces whose homotopy type depends only
on their fundamental group. These spaces arise many places in topology, especially
in its interactions with group theory.
A path-connected space whose fundamental group is isomorphic to a given group
G and which has a contractible universal covering space is called a K(G,1) space. The
вҖҳ1вҖҷ here refers to ПҖ1 . More general K(G, n) spaces are studied in В§4.2. All these spaces
are called EilenbergвҖ“MacLane spaces, though in the case n = 1 they were studied by

88
Chapter 1
The Fundamental Group
Hurewicz before Eilenberg and MacLane took up the general case.
Here are some
examples:
Example 1B.1. S1 is a K(Z, 1). More generally, a connected graph is a K(G, 1) with
G a free group, since by the results of В§1.A its universal cover is a tree, hence con-
tractible.
Example 1B.2. Closed surfaces with inп¬Ғnite ПҖ1 , in other words, closed surfaces other
than S2 and RP2 , are K(G, 1)вҖҷs. This will be shown in Example 1B.14 below. It also
follows from the theorem in surface theory that the only simply-connected surfaces
without boundary are S2 and R2 , so the universal cover of a closed surface with
inп¬Ғnite fundamental group must be R2 since it is noncompact. Nonclosed surfaces
deformation retract onto graphs, so such surfaces are K(G, 1)вҖҷs with G free.
Example 1B.3. The inп¬Ғnite-dimensional projective space RPвҲһis a K(Z2, 1) since its
universal cover is SвҲһ, which is contractible. To show the latter fact, a homotopy from
the identity map of SвҲһto a constant map can be constructed in two stages as follows.
First, deп¬Ғne ft : RвҲһвҶ’RвҲһby ft(x1, x2, В·В·В·) = (1 вҲ’t)(x1, x2, В·В·В·) + t(0, x1, x2, В·В·В·).
This takes nonzero vectors to nonzero vectors for all t вҲҲ[0, 1], so ft/|ft| gives a ho-
motopy from the identity map of SвҲһto the map (x1, x2, В·В·В·),(0, x1, x2, В·В·В·). Then a
homotopy from this map to a constant map is given by gt/|gt| where gt(x1, x2, В·В·В·) =
(1 вҲ’t)(0, x1, x2, В·В·В·) + t(1, 0, 0, В·В·В·).
Example 1B.4. Generalizing the preceding example, we can construct a K(Zm, 1) as
an inп¬Ғnite-dimensional lens space SвҲһ/Zm , where Zm acts on SвҲһ, regarded as the
unit sphere in CвҲһ, by scalar multiplication by mth roots of unity, a generator of this
action being the map (z1, z2, В·В·В·) , e2ПҖi/m(z1, z2, В·В·В·). It is not hard to check that
this is a covering space action.
Example 1B.5. A product K(G, 1)Г—K(H, 1) is a K(GГ—H, 1) since its universal cover
is the product of the universal covers of K(G, 1) and K(H, 1). By taking products of
circles and inп¬Ғnite-dimensional lens spaces we therefore get K(G, 1)вҖҷs for arbitrary
п¬Ғnitely generated abelian groups G. For example the n dimensional torus T n , the
product of n circles, is a K(Zn, 1).
Example 1B.6. For a closed connected subspace K of S3 that is nonempty, the com-
plement S3вҲ’K is a K(G, 1). This is a theorem in 3 manifold theory, but in the special
case that K is a torus knot the result follows from our study of torus knot comple-
ments in Examples 1.24 and 1.35. Namely, we showed that for K the torus knot Km,n
there is a deformation retraction of S3 вҲ’K onto a certain 2 dimensional complex
Xm,n having contractible universal cover. The homotopy lifting property then implies
that the universal cover of S3 вҲ’K is homotopy equivalent to the universal cover of
Xm,n , hence is also contractible.

K(G,1) Spaces and Graphs of Groups
Section 1.B
89
Example 1B.7. It is not hard to construct a K(G, 1) for an arbitrary group G, us-
ing the notion of a вҲҶcomplex deп¬Ғned in В§2.1.
Let EG be the вҲҶcomplex whose
n simplices are the ordered (n + 1) tuples [g0, В·В·В· , gn] of elements of G. Such an
n simplex attaches to the (n вҲ’1) simplices [g0, В·В·В· , bgi, В·В·В· , gn] in the obvious way,
just as a standard simplex attaches to its faces. (The notation bgi means that this
vertex is deleted.) The complex EG is contractible by the homotopy ht that slides
each point x вҲҲ[g0, В·В·В· , gn] along the line segment in [e, g0, В·В·В· , gn] from x to the
vertex [e], where e is the identity element of G. This is well-deп¬Ғned in EG since
when we restrict to a face [g0, В·В·В· , bgi, В·В·В· , gn] we have the linear deformation to [e]
in [e, g0, В·В·В· , bgi, В·В·В· , gn]. Note that ht carries [e] around the loop [e, e], so ht is not
actually a deformation retraction of EG onto [e].
The group G acts on EG by left multiplication, an element g вҲҲG taking the
simplex [g0, В·В·В· , gn] linearly onto the simplex [gg0, В·В·В· , ggn]. Only the identity e
takes any simplex to itself, so by an exercise at the end of this section, the action
of G on EG is a covering space action. Hence the quotient map EGвҶ’EG/G is the
universal cover of the orbit space BG = EG/G, and BG is a K(G, 1).
Since G acts on EG by freely permuting simplices, BG inherits a вҲҶcomplex
structure from EG. The action of G on EG identiп¬Ғes all the vertices of EG, so BG
has just one vertex. To describe the вҲҶcomplex structure on BG explicitly, note п¬Ғrst
that every n simplex of EG can be written uniquely in the form
[g0, g0g1, g0g1g2, В·В·В· , g0g1 В·В·В· gn] = g0[e, g1, g1g2, В·В·В· , g1 В·В·В· gn]
The image of this simplex in BG may be denoted unambiguously by the symbol
[g1|g2| В·В·В· |gn].
In this вҖҳbarвҖҷ notation the gi вҖҷs and their ordered products can be
used to label edges, viewing an
edge label as the ratio between
the two labels on the vertices
at the endpoints of the edge,
as indicated in the п¬Ғgure. With
g
g
g
0
g0
g3
g3
g0
1
g1
g1
g0g1
g0g1
2
g
g0g1
2
g
g0g1
2
g3
g2
g3
g
g1
2
g
g1
2
g2
g2
g
g1
2
this notation, the boundary of
a simplex [g1| В·В·В· |gn] of BG
consists of the simplices [g2| В·В·В· |gn], [g1| В·В·В· |gnвҲ’1], and [g1| В·В·В· |gigi+1| В·В·В· |gn]
for i = 1, В·В·В· , n вҲ’1.
This construction of a K(G, 1) produces a rather large space, since BG is al-
ways inп¬Ғnite-dimensional, and if G is inп¬Ғnite, BG has an inп¬Ғnite number of cells in
each positive dimension. For example, BZ is much bigger than S1 , the most efп¬Ғcient
K(Z, 1). On the other hand, BG has the virtue of being functorial: A homomorphism
f : GвҶ’H induces a map Bf : BGвҶ’BH sending a simplex [g1| В·В·В· |gn] to the simplex
[f(g1)| В·В·В· |f (gn)]. A different construction of a K(G, 1) is given in В§4.2. Here one
starts with any 2 dimensional complex having fundamental group G, for example

90
Chapter 1
The Fundamental Group
the complex XG associated to a presentation of G, and then one attaches cells of di-
mension 3 and higher to make the universal cover contractible without affecting ПҖ1 .
In general, it is hard to get any control on the number of higher-dimensional cells
needed in this construction, so it too can be rather inefп¬Ғcient. Indeed, п¬Ғnding an
efп¬Ғcient K(G, 1) for a given group G is often a difп¬Ғcult problem.
It is a curious and almost paradoxical fact that if G contains any elements of п¬Ғnite
order, then every K(G, 1) CW complex must be inп¬Ғnite-dimensional. This is shown
in Proposition 2.45. In particular the inп¬Ғnite-dimensional lens space K(Zm, 1)вҖҷs in
Example 1B.4 cannot be replaced by any п¬Ғnite-dimensional complex.
In spite of the great latitude possible in the construction of K(G, 1)вҖҷs, there is a
very nice homotopical uniqueness property that accounts for much of the interest in
K(G, 1)вҖҷs:
Theorem 1B.8. The homotopy type of a CW complex K(G, 1) is uniquely determined
by G.
Having a unique homotopy type of K(G, 1)вҖҷs associated to each group G means
that algebraic invariants of spaces that depend only on homotopy type, such as ho-
mology and cohomology groups, become invariants of groups. This has proved to be a
quite fruitful idea, and has been much studied both from the algebraic and topological
viewpoints. The discussion following Proposition 2.45 gives a few references.
The preceding theorem will follow easily from:
Proposition 1B.9. Let X be a connected CW complex and let Y be a K(G, 1). Then
every homomorphism ПҖ1(X, x0)вҶ’ПҖ1(Y, y0) is induced by a map (X, x0)вҶ’(Y, y0)
that is unique up to homotopy п¬Ғxing x0 .
To deduce the theorem from this, let X and Y be CW complex K(G, 1)вҖҷs with iso-
morphic fundamental groups. The proposition gives maps f : (X, x0)вҶ’(Y, y0) and
g : (Y, y0)вҶ’(X, x0) inducing inverse isomorphisms ПҖ1(X, x0) вүҲПҖ1(Y, y0). Then f g
and gf induce the identity on ПҖ1 and hence are homotopic to the identity maps.
Proof of 1B.9: Let us п¬Ғrst consider the case that X has a single 0 cell, the base-
point x0 . Given a homomorphism П• : ПҖ1(X, x0)вҶ’ПҖ1(Y, y0), we begin the construc-
tion of a map f : (X, x0)вҶ’(Y, y0) with fвҲ—= П• by setting f (x0) = y0 . Each 1 cell
e1
Оұ of X has closure a circle determining an element
[e1
Оұ] вҲҲПҖ1(X, x0), and we let f on the closure of e1
Оұ
X
ПҖ1
1
0
(
)
x
П•
вҲ—
,
X
ПҖ1
0
(
)
x
,
Y
ПҖ1
0
(
)
y
,
f
вҲ—
i
вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҶ’
вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҶ’
вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҶ’
be a map representing П•([e1
Оұ]). If i : X1>X denotes
the inclusion, then П•iвҲ—= fвҲ—since ПҖ1(X1, x0) is gen-
erated by the elements [e1
Оұ].
To extend f over a cell e2
ОІ with attaching map ПҲОІ : S1вҶ’X1 , all we need is for the
composition f ПҲОІ to be nullhomotopic. Choosing a basepoint s0 вҲҲS1 and a path in X1
from ПҲОІ(s0) to x0 , ПҲОІ determines an element [ПҲОІ] вҲҲПҖ1(X1, x0), and the existence

K(G,1) Spaces and Graphs of Groups
Section 1.B
91
of a nullhomotopy of f ПҲОІ is equivalent to fвҲ—([ПҲОІ]) being zero in ПҖ1(Y, y0). We
have iвҲ—([ПҲОІ]) = 0 since the cell e2
ОІ provides a nullhomotopy of ПҲОІ in X . Hence
fвҲ—([ПҲОІ]) = П•iвҲ—([ПҲОІ]) = 0, and so f can be extended over e2
ОІ .
Extending f inductively over cells en
Оі with n > 2 is possible since the attaching
maps ПҲОі : SnвҲ’1вҶ’XnвҲ’1 have nullhomotopic compositions f ПҲОі : SnвҲ’1вҶ’Y .
This is
because f ПҲОі lifts to the universal cover of Y if n > 2, and this cover is contractible
by hypothesis, so the lift of f ПҲОі is nullhomotopic, hence also f ПҲОі itself.
Turning to the uniqueness statement, if two maps f0, f1 : (X, x0)вҶ’(Y, y0) in-
duce the same homomorphism on ПҖ1 , then we see immediately that their restrictions
to X1 are homotopic, п¬Ғxing x0 .
To extend the resulting map X1Г—I вҲӘXГ—вҲӮIвҶ’Y
over the remaining cells enГ—(0, 1) of XГ—I we can proceed just as in the preceding
paragraph since these cells have dimension n + 1 > 2. Thus we obtain a homotopy
ft : (X, x0)вҶ’(Y, y0), п¬Ғnishing the proof in the case that X has a single 0 cell.
The case that X has more than one 0 cell can be treated by a small elaboration
on this argument. Choose a maximal tree T вҠӮX . To construct a map f realizing a
given П•, begin by setting f (T) = y0 . Then each edge e1
Оұ in X вҲ’T determines an
element [e1
Оұ] вҲҲПҖ1(X, x0), and we let f on the closure of e1
Оұ be a map representing
П•([e1
Оұ]). Extending f over higher-dimensional cells then proceeds just as before.
Constructing a homotopy ft joining two given maps f0 and f1 with f0вҲ—= f1вҲ—also
has an extra step. Let ht : X1вҶ’X1 be a homotopy starting with h0 = 11 and restricting
to a deformation retraction of T onto x0 . (It is easy to extend such a deformation
retraction to a homotopy deп¬Ғned on all of X1 .) We can construct a homotopy from
f0|X1 to f1|X1 by п¬Ғrst deforming f0|X1 and f1|X1 to take T to y0 by composing with
ht , then applying the earlier argument to obtain a homotopy between the modiп¬Ғed
f0|X1 and f1|X1 . Having a homotopy f0|X1 вүғf1|X1 we extend this over all of X in
the same way as before.
вҠ”вҠ“
The п¬Ғrst part of the preceding proof also works for the 2 dimensional complexes
XG associated to presentations of groups. Thus every homomorphism GвҶ’H is re-
alized as the induced homomorphism of some map XGвҶ’XH . However, there is no
uniqueness statement for this map, and it can easily happen that different presenta-
tions of a group G give XG вҖҷs that are not homotopy equivalent.
Graphs of Groups
As an illustration of how K(G, 1) spaces can be useful in group theory, we shall
describe a procedure for assembling a collection of K(G, 1)вҖҷs together into a K(G, 1)
for a larger group G. Group-theoretically, this gives a method for assembling smaller
groups together to form a larger group, generalizing the notion of free products.
Let О“ be a graph that is connected and oriented, that is, its edges are viewed as
arrows, each edge having a speciп¬Ғed direction. Suppose that at each vertex v of О“ we

92
Chapter 1
The Fundamental Group
place a group Gv and along each edge e of О“ we put a homomorphism П•e from the
group at the tail of the edge to the group at the head of the edge. We call this data a
graph of groups. Now build a space BО“ by putting the space BGv from Example 1B.7
at each vertex v of О“ and then п¬Ғlling in a mapping cylinder of the map BП•e along
each edge e of О“ , identifying the two ends of the mapping cylinder with the two BGv вҖҷs
at the ends of e. The resulting space BО“ is then a CW complex since the maps BП•e
take n cells homeomorphically onto n cells. In fact, the cell structure on BО“ can be
canonically subdivided into a вҲҶcomplex structure using the prism construction from
the proof of Theorem 2.10, but we will not need to do this here.
More generally, instead of BGv one could take any CW complex K(Gv, 1) at the
vertex v , and then along edges put mapping cylinders of maps realizing the homo-
morphisms П•e . We leave it for the reader to check that the resulting space KО“ is
homotopy equivalent to the BО“ constructed above.
Example 1B.10. Suppose О“ consists of one central vertex with a number of edges
radiating out from it, and the group Gv at this central vertex is trivial, hence also all
the edge homomorphisms. Then van KampenвҖҷs theorem implies that ПҖ1(KО“) is the
free product of the groups at all the outer vertices.
In view of this example, we shall call ПҖ1(KО“) for a general graph of groups О“ the
graph product of the vertex groups Gv with respect to the edge homomorphisms П•e .
The name for ПҖ1(KО“) that is generally used in the literature is the rather awkward
phrase, вҖҳthe fundamental group of the graph of groups.вҖҷ
Here is the main result we shall prove about graphs of groups:
Theorem 1B.11. If all the edge homomorphisms П•e are injective, then KО“ is a
K(G, 1) and the inclusions K(Gv, 1) > KО“ induce injective maps on ПҖ1 .
Before giving the proof, let us look at some interesting special cases:
Example 1B.12: Free Products with Amalgamation. Suppose the graph of groups is
AвҶҗCвҶ’B , with the two maps monomorphisms. One can regard this data as speci-
fying embeddings of C as subgroups of A and B . Applying van KampenвҖҷs theorem
to the decomposition of KО“ into its two mapping cylinders, we see that ПҖ1(KО“) is
the quotient of A вҲ—B obtained by identifying the subgroup C вҠӮA with the subgroup
C вҠӮB . The standard notation for this group is A вҲ—C B , the free product of A and
B amalgamated along the subgroup C . According to the theorem, A вҲ—C B contains
both A and B as subgroups.
For example, a free product with amalgamation Z вҲ—Z Z can be realized by map-
ping cylinders of the maps S1вҶҗS1вҶ’S1 that are m sheeted and n sheeted covering
spaces, respectively. We studied this case in Examples 1.24 and 1.35 where we showed
that the complex KО“ is a deformation retract of the complement of a torus knot in
S3 if m and n are relatively prime. It is a basic result in 3 manifold theory that the

K(G,1) Spaces and Graphs of Groups
Section 1.B
93
complement of every smooth knot in S3 can be built up by iterated graph of groups
constructions with injective edge homomorphisms, starting with free groups, so the
theorem implies that these knot complements are K(G, 1)вҖҷs. Their universal covers
are all R3 , in fact.
Example 1B.13: HNN Extensions. Consider a graph of groups C
A
ПҲ
П•
with П•
and ПҲ both monomorphisms. This is analogous to the previous case AвҶҗCвҶ’B ,
but with the two groups A and B coalesced to a single group. The group ПҖ1(KО“),
which was denoted A вҲ—C B in the previous case, is now denoted AвҲ—C . To see what
this group looks like, let us regard KО“ as being obtained from K(A, 1) by attaching
K(C, 1)Г—I along the two ends K(C, 1)Г—вҲӮI via maps realizing the monomorphisms
П• and ПҲ. Using a K(C, 1) with a single 0 cell, we see that KО“ can be obtained from
K(A, 1) вҲЁS1 by attaching cells of dimension two and greater, so ПҖ1(KО“) is a quotient
of AвҲ—Z, and it is not hard to п¬Ғgure out that the relations deп¬Ғning this quotient are of
the form tП•(c)tвҲ’1 = ПҲ(c) where t is a generator of the Z factor and c ranges over
C , or a set of generators for C . We leave the veriп¬Ғcation of this for the Exercises.
As a very special case, taking П• = ПҲ = 11 gives AвҲ—A = AГ—Z since we can take
KО“ = K(A, 1)Г—S1 in this case. More generally, taking П• = 11 with ПҲ an arbitrary
automorphism of A, we realize any semidirect product of A and Z as AвҲ—A .
For
example, the Klein bottle occurs this way, with П• realized by the identity map of S1
and ПҲ by a reп¬Ӯection. In these cases when П• = 11 we could realize the same group
ПҖ1(KО“) using a slightly simpler graph of groups, with a single vertex, labeled A, and
a single edge, labeled ПҲ.
Here is another special case. Suppose we take a torus, delete a small open disk,
then identify the resulting boundary circle with a longitudinal circle of the torus. This
produces a space X that happens to be homeomorphic to a subspace of the stan-
dard picture of a Klein bottle in R3 ; see Exercise 12 of В§1.2. The fundamental group
ПҖ1(X) has the form (Z вҲ—Z) вҲ—Z Z with the deп¬Ғning relation tbВұ1tвҲ’1 = abaвҲ’1bвҲ’1
where a is a meridional loop and b is a longitudinal loop on the torus. The sign
of the exponent in the term bВұ1 is immaterial since the two ways of glueing the
boundary circle to the longitude produce homeomorphic spaces. The group ПҖ1(X) =

a, b, t |||| tbtвҲ’1abaвҲ’1bвҲ’1 
abelianizes to ZГ—Z, but to show that ПҖ1(X) is not iso-
morphic to Z вҲ—Z takes some work. There is a surjection ПҖ1(X)вҶ’Z вҲ—Z obtained by
setting b = 1. This has nontrivial kernel since b is nontrivial in ПҖ1(X) by the pre-
ceding theorem. If ПҖ1(X) were isomorphic to Z вҲ—Z we would then have a surjective
homomorphism Z вҲ—ZвҶ’Z вҲ—Z that was not an isomorphism. However, it is a theorem
in group theory that a free group F is hopп¬Ғan вҖ” every surjective homomorphism
FвҶ’F must be injective. Hence ПҖ1(X) is not free.
Example 1B.14: Closed Surfaces. A closed orientable surface M of genus two or
greater can be cut along a circle into two compact surfaces M1 and M2 such that the
