[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 1. The Fundamental Group
현재 소단원: 1.3.ex Exercises
직전 소단원: 「1.3.3 Deck Transformations and Group Actions」
[연습문제]
Covering Spaces
Section 1.3
79
Exercises
1. For a covering space p : eX→X and a subspace A ⊂X , let eA = p−1(A). Show that
the restriction p : eA→A is a covering space.
2. Show that if p1 : eX1→X1 and p2 : eX2→X2 are covering spaces, so is their product
p1×p2 : eX1× eX2→X1×X2 .
3. Let p : eX→X be a covering space with p−1(x) ﬁnite and nonempty for all x ∈X .
Show that eX is compact Hausdorff iff X is compact Hausdorff.
4. Construct a simply-connected covering space of the space X ⊂R3 that is the union
of a sphere and a diameter. Do the same when X is the union of a sphere and a circle
intersecting it in two points.
5. Let X be the subspace of R2 consisting of the four sides of the square [0, 1]×[0, 1]
together with the segments of the vertical lines x = 1/2, 1/3, 1/4, ··· inside the square.
Show that for every covering space eX→X there is some neighborhood of the left
edge of X that lifts homeomorphically to eX . Deduce that X has no simply-connected
covering space.
6. Let X be the shrinking wedge of circles in Example 1.25, and let eX be its covering
space shown in the ﬁgure below.
Construct a two-sheeted covering space Y→eX such that the composition Y→eX→X
of the two covering spaces is not a covering space. Note that a composition of two
covering spaces does have the unique path lifting property, however.
7. Let Y be the quasi-circle shown in the ﬁgure, a closed subspace
of R2 consisting of a portion of the graph of y = sin(1/x), the
segment [−1, 1] in the y axis, and an arc connecting these two
pieces.
Collapsing the segment of Y in the y axis to a point
gives a quotient map f : Y→S1 .
Show that f does not lift to
the covering space R→S1 , even though π1(Y) = 0. Thus local
path-connectedness of Y is a necessary hypothesis in the lifting criterion.
8. Let eX and eY be simply-connected covering spaces of the path-connected, locally
path-connected spaces X and Y . Show that if X ≃Y then eX ≃eY . [Exercise 10 in
Chapter 0 may be helpful.]
9. Show that if a path-connected, locally path-connected space X has π1(X) ﬁnite,
then every map X→S1 is nullhomotopic. [Use the covering space R→S1 .]
10. Find all the connected 2 sheeted and 3 sheeted covering spaces of S1 ∨S1 , up to
isomorphism of covering spaces without basepoints.

80
Chapter 1
The Fundamental Group
11. Construct ﬁnite graphs X1 and X2 having a common ﬁnite-sheeted covering space
eX1 = eX2 , but such that there is no space having both X1 and X2 as covering spaces.
12.
Let a and b be the generators of π1(S1 ∨S1) corresponding to the two S1
summands. Draw a picture of the covering space of S1 ∨S1 corresponding to the
normal subgroup generated by a2 , b2 , and (ab)4 , and prove that this covering space
is indeed the correct one.
13.
Determine the covering space of S1 ∨S1 corresponding to the subgroup of
π1(S1 ∨S1) generated by the cubes of all elements. The covering space is 27 sheeted
and can be drawn on a torus so that the complementary regions are nine triangles
with edges labeled aaa, nine triangles with edges labeled bbb, and nine hexagons
with edges labeled ababab. [For the analogous problem with sixth powers instead
of cubes, the resulting covering space would have 228325 sheets! And for kth powers
with k sufﬁciently large, the covering space would have inﬁnitely many sheets. The
underlying group theory question here, whether the quotient of Z ∗Z obtained by
factoring out all kth powers is ﬁnite, is known as Burnside’s problem. It can also be
asked for a free group on n generators.]
14. Find all the connected covering spaces of RP2 ∨RP2 .
15. Let p : eX→X be a simply-connected covering space of X and let A ⊂X be a
path-connected, locally path-connected subspace, with eA ⊂eX a path-component of
p−1(A). Show that p : eA→A is the covering space corresponding to the kernel of the
map π1(A)→π1(X).
16. Given maps X→Y→Z such that both Y→Z and the composition X→Z are
covering spaces, show that X→Y is a covering space if Z is locally path-connected,
and show that this covering space is normal if X→Z is a normal covering space.
17. Given a group G and a normal subgroup N , show that there exists a normal
covering space eX→X with π1(X) ≈G, π1( eX) ≈N , and deck transformation group
G( eX) ≈G/N .
18. For a path-connected, locally path-connected, and semilocally simply-connected
space X , call a path-connected covering space eX→X abelian if it is normal and has
abelian deck transformation group. Show that X has an abelian covering space that is
a covering space of every other abelian covering space of X , and that such a ‘universal’
abelian covering space is unique up to isomorphism. Describe this covering space
explicitly for X = S1 ∨S1 and X = S1 ∨S1 ∨S1 .
19. Use the preceding problem to show that a closed orientable surface Mg of genus
g has a connected normal covering space with deck transformation group isomorphic
to Zn (the product of n copies of Z) iff n ≤2g. For n = 3 and g ≥3, describe such
a covering space explicitly as a subspace of R3 with translations of R3 as deck trans-
formations. Show that such a covering space in R3 exists iff there is an embedding

Covering Spaces
Section 1.3
81
of Mg in the 3 torus T 3 = S1×S1×S1 such that the induced map π1(Mg)→π1(T 3)
is surjective.
20. Construct nonnormal covering spaces of the Klein bottle by a Klein bottle and by
a torus.
21. Let X be the space obtained from a torus S1×S1 by attaching a M¨obius band via a
homeomorphism from the boundary circle of the M¨obius band to the circle S1×{x0}
in the torus. Compute π1(X), describe the universal cover of X , and describe the
action of π1(X) on the universal cover. Do the same for the space Y obtained by
attaching a M¨obius band to RP2 via a homeomorphism from its boundary circle to
the circle in RP2 formed by the 1 skeleton of the usual CW structure on RP2 .
22. Given covering space actions of groups G1 on X1 and G2 on X2 , show that the ac-
tion of G1×G2 on X1×X2 deﬁned by (g1, g2)(x1, x2) = (g1(x1), g2(x2)) is a covering
space action, and that (X1×X2)/(G1×G2) is homeomorphic to X1/G1×X2/G2 .
23. Show that if a group G acts freely and properly discontinuously on a Hausdorff
space X , then the action is a covering space action. (Here ‘properly discontinuously’
means that each x ∈X has a neighborhood U such that { g ∈G | U ∩g(U) ≠∅} is
ﬁnite.) In particular, a free action of a ﬁnite group on a Hausdorff space is a covering
space action.
24. Given a covering space action of a group G on a path-connected, locally path-
connected space X , then each subgroup H ⊂G determines a composition of covering
spaces X→X/H→X/G. Show:
(a) Every path-connected covering space between X and X/G is isomorphic to X/H
for some subgroup H ⊂G.
(b) Two such covering spaces X/H1 and X/H2 of X/G are isomorphic iff H1 and
H2 are conjugate subgroups of G.
(c) The covering space X/H→X/G is normal iff H is a normal subgroup of G, in
which case the group of deck transformations of this cover is G/H .
25. Let ϕ : R2→R2 be the linear transformation ϕ(x, y) = (2x, y/2). This generates
an action of Z on X = R2 −{0}. Show this action is a covering space action and
compute π1(X/Z). Show the orbit space X/Z is non-Hausdorff, and describe how it is
a union of four subspaces homeomorphic to S1×R, coming from the complementary
components of the x axis and the y axis.
26. For a covering space p : eX→X with X connected, locally path-connected, and
semilocally simply-connected, show:
(a) The components of eX are in one-to-one correspondence with the orbits of the
action of π1(X, x0) on the ﬁber p−1(x0).
(b) Under the Galois correspondence between connected covering spaces of X and
subgroups of π1(X, x0), the subgroup corresponding to the component of
eX

82
Chapter 1
The Fundamental Group
containing a given lift ex0 of x0 is the stabilizer of ex0 , the subgroup consisting
of elements whose action on the ﬁber leaves ex0 ﬁxed.
27. For a universal cover p : eX→X we have two actions of π1(X, x0) on the ﬁber
p−1(x0), namely the action given by lifting loops at x0 and the action given by re-
stricting deck transformations to the ﬁber.
Are these two actions the same when
X = S1 ∨S1 or X = S1×S1 ? Do the actions always agree when π1(X, x0) is abelian?
28. Generalize the proof of Theorem 1.7 to show that for a covering space action of a
group G on a simply-connected space Y , π1(Y/G) is isomorphic to G. [If Y is locally
path-connected, this is a special case of part (b) of Proposition 1.40.]
29. Let Y be path-connected, locally path-connected, and simply-connected, and let
G1 and G2 be subgroups of Homeo(Y) deﬁning covering space actions on Y . Show
that the orbit spaces Y/G1 and Y/G2 are homeomorphic iff G1 and G2 are conjugate
subgroups of Homeo(Y).
30. Draw the Cayley graph of the group Z ∗Z2 =

a, b |||| b2 
.
31. Show that the normal covering spaces of S1 ∨S1 are precisely the graphs that
are Cayley graphs of groups with two generators. More generally, the normal cov-
ering spaces of the wedge sum of n circles are the Cayley graphs of groups with n
generators.
32.
Consider covering spaces p : eX→X with
eX and X connected CW complexes,
the cells of eX projecting homeomorphically onto cells of X . Restricting p to the
1 skeleton then gives a covering space eX1→X1 over the 1 skeleton of X . Show:
(a) Two such covering spaces eX1→X and eX2→X are isomorphic iff the restrictions
eX1
1→X1 and eX1
2→X1 are isomorphic.
(b)
eX→X is a normal covering space iff eX1→X1 is normal.
(c) The groups of deck transformations of the coverings eX→X and eX1→X1 are
isomorphic, via the restriction map.
33.
In Example 1.44 let d be the greatest common divisor of m and n, and let
m′ = m/d and n′ = n/d.
Show that the graph Tm,n/K consists of m′ vertices
labeled a, n′ vertices labeled b, together with d edges joining each a vertex to
each b vertex. Deduce that the subgroup K ⊂Gm,n is free on dm′n′ −m′ −n′ + 1
generators.

Graphs and Free Groups
Section 1.A
83
Since all groups can be realized as fundamental groups of spaces, this opens the
way for using topology to study algebraic properties of groups. The topics in this
section and the next give some illustrations of this principle, mainly using covering
space theory.
We remind the reader that the Additional Topics which form the remainder of
this chapter are not to be regarded as an essential part of the basic core of the book.
Readers who are eager to move on to new topics should feel free to skip ahead.
By deﬁnition, a graph is a 1 dimensional CW complex, in other words, a space
X obtained from a discrete set X0 by attaching a collection of 1 cells eα . Thus X
is obtained from the disjoint union of X0 with closed intervals Iα by identifying the
two endpoints of each Iα with points of X0 . The points of X0 are the vertices and
the 1 cells the edges of X . Note that with this deﬁnition an edge does not include its
endpoints, so an edge is an open subset of X . The two endpoints of an edge can be
the same vertex, so the closure eα of an edge eα is homeomorphic either to I or S1 .
Since X has the quotient topology from the disjoint union X0 `
α Iα , a subset of X
is open (or closed) iff it intersects the closure eα of each edge eα in an open (or closed)
set in eα . One says that X has the weak topology with respect to the subspaces eα .
In this topology a sequence of points in the interiors of distinct edges forms a closed
subset, hence never converges. This is true in particular if the edges containing the
sequence all have a common vertex and one tries to choose the sequence so that it
gets ‘closer and closer’ to the vertex. Thus if there is a vertex that is the endpoint
of inﬁnitely many edges, then the weak topology cannot be a metric topology. An
exercise at the end of this section is to show the converse, that the weak topology is
a metric topology if each vertex is an endpoint of only ﬁnitely many edges.
A basis for the topology of X consists of the open intervals in the edges together
with the path-connected neighborhoods of the vertices. A neighborhood of the latter
sort about a vertex v is the union of connected open neighborhoods Uα of v in eα
for all eα containing v . In particular, we see that X is locally path-connected. Hence
a graph is connected iff it is path-connected.
If X has only ﬁnitely many vertices and edges, then X is compact, being the
continuous image of the compact space X0 `
α Iα . The converse is also true, and more
generally, a compact subset C of a graph X can meet only ﬁnitely many vertices and
edges of X . To see this, let the subspace D ⊂C consist of the vertices in C together
with one point in each edge that C meets. Then D is a closed subset of X since it
