[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 2. Homology
현재 소단원: 2.intro 개관 (챕터 도입부)
직전 소단원: 「1.B K(G,1) Spaces and Graphs of Groups」
[본문]
The fundamental group π1(X) is especially useful when studying spaces of low
dimension, as one would expect from its deﬁnition which involves only maps from
low-dimensional spaces into X , namely loops I→X and homotopies of loops, maps
I×I→X . The deﬁnition in terms of objects that are at most 2 dimensional manifests
itself for example in the fact that when X is a CW complex, π1(X) depends only on
the 2 skeleton of X . In view of the low-dimensional nature of the fundamental group,
we should not expect it to be a very reﬁned tool for dealing with high-dimensional
spaces. Thus it cannot distinguish between spheres Sn with n ≥2. This limitation
to low dimensions can be removed by considering the natural higher-dimensional
analogs of π1(X), the homotopy groups πn(X), which are deﬁned in terms of maps
of the n dimensional cube In into X and homotopies In×I→X of such maps. Not
surprisingly, when X is a CW complex, πn(X) depends only on the (n + 1) skeleton
of X . And as one might hope, homotopy groups do indeed distinguish spheres of all
dimensions since πi(Sn) is 0 for i < n and Z for i = n.
However, the higher-dimensional homotopy groups have the serious drawback
that they are extremely difﬁcult to compute in general. Even for simple spaces like
spheres, the calculation of πi(Sn) for i > n turns out to be a huge problem. For-
tunately there is a more computable alternative to homotopy groups: the homology
groups Hn(X). Like πn(X), the homology group Hn(X) for a CW complex X de-
pends only on the (n + 1) skeleton. For spheres, the homology groups Hi(Sn) are
isomorphic to the homotopy groups πi(Sn) in the range 1 ≤i ≤n, but homology
groups have the advantage that Hi(Sn) = 0 for i > n.
The computability of homology groups does not come for free, unfortunately.
The deﬁnition of homology groups is decidedly less transparent than the deﬁnition
of homotopy groups, and once one gets beyond the deﬁnition there is a certain amount
of technical machinery to be set up before any real calculations and applications can
be given. In the exposition below we approach the deﬁnition of Hn(X) by two prelim-
inary stages, ﬁrst giving a few motivating examples nonrigorously, then constructing

98
Chapter 2
Homology
a restricted model of homology theory called simplicial homology, before plunging
into the general theory, known as singular homology. After the deﬁnition of singular
homology has been assimilated, the real work of establishing its basic properties be-
gins. This takes close to 20 pages, and there is no getting around the fact that it is a
substantial effort. This takes up most of the ﬁrst section of the chapter, with small
digressions only for two applications to classical theorems of Brouwer: the ﬁxed point
theorem and ‘invariance of dimension.’
The second section of the chapter gives more applications, including the ho-
mology deﬁnition of Euler characteristic and Brouwer’s notion of degree for maps
Sn→Sn . However, the main thrust of this section is toward developing techniques
for calculating homology groups efﬁciently. The maximally efﬁcient method is known
as cellular homology, whose power comes perhaps from the fact that it is ‘homology
squared’ — homology deﬁned in terms of homology. Another quite useful tool is
Mayer–Vietoris sequences, the analog for homology of van Kampen’s theorem for the
fundamental group.
An interesting feature of homology that begins to emerge after one has worked
with it for a while is that it is the basic properties of homology that are used most
often, and not the actual deﬁnition itself. This suggests that an axiomatic approach
to homology might be possible. This is indeed the case, and in the third section of
the chapter we list axioms which completely characterize homology groups for CW
complexes. One could take the viewpoint that these rather algebraic axioms are all that
really matters about homology groups, that the geometry involved in the deﬁnition of
homology is secondary, needed only to show that the axiomatic theory is not vacuous.
The extent to which one adopts this viewpoint is a matter of taste, and the route taken
here of postponing the axioms until the theory is well-established is just one of several
possible approaches.
The chapter then concludes with three optional sections of Additional Topics. The
ﬁrst is rather brief, relating H1(X) to π1(X), while the other two contain a selection
of classical applications of homology. These include the n dimensional version of the
Jordan curve theorem and the ‘invariance of domain’ theorem, both due to Brouwer,
along with the Lefschetz ﬁxed point theorem.
The Idea of Homology
The difﬁculty with the higher homotopy groups πn is that they are not directly
computable from a cell structure as π1 is. For example, the 2-sphere has no cells in
dimensions greater than 2, yet its n dimensional homotopy group πn(S2) is nonzero
for inﬁnitely many values of n.
Homology groups, by contrast, are quite directly
related to cell structures, and may indeed be regarded as simply an algebraization of
the ﬁrst layer of geometry in cell structures: how cells of dimension n attach to cells
of dimension n −1.

The Idea of Homology
99
Let us look at some examples to see what the idea is. Consider the graph X1 shown
in the ﬁgure, consisting of two vertices joined by four edges.
When studying the fundamental group of X1 we consider
d
a
x
y
c
b
loops formed by sequences of edges, starting and ending
at a ﬁxed basepoint. For example, at the basepoint x , the
loop ab−1 travels forward along the edge a, then backward
along b, as indicated by the exponent −1. A more compli-
cated loop would be ac−1bd−1ca−1 . A salient feature of the
fundamental group is that it is generally nonabelian, which both enriches and compli-
cates the theory. Suppose we simplify matters by abelianizing. Thus for example the
two loops ab−1 and b−1a are to be regarded as equal if we make a commute with
b−1 . These two loops ab−1 and b−1a are really the same circle, just with a different
choice of starting and ending point: x for ab−1 and y for b−1a. The same thing
happens for all loops: Rechoosing the basepoint in a loop just permutes its letters
cyclically, so a byproduct of abelianizing is that we no longer have to pin all our loops
down to a ﬁxed basepoint. Thus loops become cycles, without a chosen basepoint.
Having abelianized, let us switch to additive notation, so cycles become linear
combinations of edges with integer coefﬁcients, such as a −b + c −d. Let us call
these linear combinations chains of edges.
Some chains can be decomposed into
cycles in several different ways, for example (a −c) + (b −d) = (a −d) + (b −c),
and if we adopt an algebraic viewpoint then we do not want to distinguish between
these different decompositions. Thus we broaden the meaning of the term ‘cycle’ to
be simply any linear combination of edges for which at least one decomposition into
cycles in the previous more geometric sense exists.
What is the condition for a chain to be a cycle in this more algebraic sense? A
geometric cycle, thought of as a path traversed in time, is distinguished by the prop-
erty that it enters each vertex the same number of times that it leaves the vertex. For
an arbitrary chain ka + ℓb + mc + nd, the net number of times this chain enters y
is k + ℓ+ m + n since each of a, b, c , and d enters y once. Similarly, each of the
four edges leaves x once, so the net number of times the chain ka + ℓb + mc + nd
enters x is −k −ℓ−m −n. Thus the condition for ka + ℓb + mc + nd to be a cycle
is simply k + ℓ+ m + n = 0.
To describe this result in a way that would generalize to all graphs, let C1 be the
free abelian group with basis the edges a, b, c, d and let C0 be the free abelian group
with basis the vertices x, y . Elements of C1 are chains of edges, or 1 dimensional
chains, and elements of C0 are linear combinations of vertices, or 0 dimensional
chains. Deﬁne a homomorphism ∂: C1→C0 by sending each basis element a, b, c, d
to y −x , the vertex at the head of the edge minus the vertex at the tail. Thus we have
∂(ka + ℓb + mc + nd) = (k + ℓ+ m + n)y −(k + ℓ+ m + n)x , and the cycles are
precisely the kernel of ∂. It is a simple calculation to verify that a−b, b−c , and c −d

100
Chapter 2
Homology
form a basis for this kernel. Thus every cycle in X1 is a unique linear combination of
these three most obvious cycles. By means of these three basic cycles we convey the
geometric information that the graph X1 has three visible ‘holes,’ the empty spaces
between the four edges.
Let us now enlarge the preceding graph X1 by attaching a 2 cell A along the
cycle a −b, producing a 2 dimensional cell complex X2 . If
x
y
d
c
a
b
A
we think of the 2 cell A as being oriented clockwise, then
we can regard its boundary as the cycle a −b. This cycle is
now homotopically trivial since we can contract it to a point
by sliding over A. In other words, it no longer encloses a
hole in X2 .
This suggests that we form a quotient of the
group of cycles in the preceding example by factoring out
the subgroup generated by a −b. In this quotient the cycles a −c and b −c , for
example, become equivalent, consistent with the fact that they are homotopic in X2 .
Algebraically, we can deﬁne now a pair of homomorphisms C2
∂2
-----→C1
∂1
-----→C0
where C2 is the inﬁnite cyclic group generated by A and ∂2(A) = a −b. The map
∂1 is the boundary homomorphism in the previous example.
The quotient group
we are interested in is Ker ∂1/ Im ∂2 , the 1 dimensional cycles modulo those that are
boundaries, the multiples of a−b. This quotient group is the homology group H1(X2).
The previous example can be ﬁt into this scheme too by taking C2 to be zero since
there are no 2 cells in X1 , so in this case H1(X1) = Ker ∂1/ Im ∂2 = Ker ∂1 , which as
we saw was free abelian on three generators. In the present example, H1(X2) is free
abelian on two generators, b −c and c −d, expressing the geometric fact that by
ﬁlling in the 2 cell A we have reduced the number of ‘holes’ in our space from three
to two.
Suppose we enlarge X2 to a space X3 by attaching a second 2 cell B along the
same cycle a−b. This gives a 2 dimensional chain group C2
x
y
d
a
c
b
consisting of linear combinations of A and B , and the bound-
ary homomorphism ∂2 : C2→C1 sends both A and B to a−b.
The homology group H1(X3) = Ker ∂1/ Im ∂2 is the same as
for X2 , but now ∂2 has a nontrivial kernel, the inﬁnite cyclic
group generated by A−B . We view A−B as a 2 dimensional
cycle, generating the homology group H2(X3) = Ker ∂2 ≈Z.
Topologically, the cycle A −B is the sphere formed by the cells A and B together
with their common boundary circle. This spherical cycle detects the presence of a
‘hole’ in X3 , the missing interior of the sphere. However, since this hole is enclosed
by a sphere rather than a circle, it is of a different sort from the holes detected by
H1(X3) ≈Z×Z, which are detected by the cycles b −c and c −d.
Let us continue one more step and construct a complex X4 from X3 by attaching
a 3 cell C along the 2 sphere formed by A and B . This creates a chain group C3

The Idea of Homology
101
generated by this 3 cell C , and we deﬁne a boundary homomorphism ∂3 : C3→C2
sending C to A −B since the cycle A −B should be viewed as the boundary of C
in the same way that the 1 dimensional cycle a −b is the boundary of A. Now we
have a sequence of three boundary homomorphisms C3
∂3
-----→C2
∂2
-----→C1
∂1
-----→C0 and
the quotient H2(X4) = Ker ∂2/ Im ∂3 has become trivial. Also H3(X4) = Ker ∂3 = 0.
The group H1(X4) is the same as H1(X3), namely Z×Z, so this is the only nontrivial
homology group of X4 .
It is clear what the general pattern of the examples is. For a cell complex X one
has chain groups Cn(X) which are free abelian groups with basis the n cells of X ,
and there are boundary homomorphisms ∂n : Cn(X)→Cn−1(X), in terms of which
one deﬁnes the homology group Hn(X) = Ker ∂n/ Im ∂n+1 . The major difﬁculty is
how to deﬁne ∂n in general. For n = 1 this is easy: The boundary of an oriented
edge is the vertex at its head minus the vertex at its tail. The next case n = 2 is also
not hard, at least for cells attached along cycles that are simply loops of edges, for
then the boundary of the cell is this cycle of edges, with the appropriate signs taking
orientations into account. But for larger n, matters become more complicated. Even
if one restricts attention to cell complexes formed from polyhedral cells with nice
attaching maps, there is still the matter of orientations to sort out.
The best solution to this problem seems to be to adopt an indirect approach.
Arbitrary polyhedra can always be subdivided into special polyhedra called simplices
(the triangle and the tetrahedron are the 2 dimensional and 3 dimensional instances)
so there is no loss of generality, though initially there is some loss of efﬁciency, in
restricting attention entirely to simplices. For simplices there is no difﬁculty in deﬁn-
ing boundary maps or in handling orientations. So one obtains a homology theory,
called simplicial homology, for cell complexes built from simplices. Still, this is a
rather restricted class of spaces, and the theory itself has a certain rigidity that makes
it awkward to work with.
The way around these obstacles is to step back from the geometry of spaces
decomposed into simplices and to consider instead something which at ﬁrst glance
seems wildly more complicated, the collection of all possible continuous maps of
simplices into a given space X . These maps generate tremendously large chain groups
Cn(X), but the quotients Hn(X) = Ker ∂n/ Im ∂n+1 , called singular homology groups,
turn out to be much smaller, at least for reasonably nice spaces X . In particular, for
spaces like those in the four examples above, the singular homology groups coincide
with the homology groups we computed from the cellular chains. And as we shall
see later in this chapter, singular homology allows one to deﬁne these nice cellular
homology groups for all cell complexes, and in particular to solve the problem of
deﬁning the boundary maps for cellular chains.

102
Chapter 2
Homology
The most important homology theory in algebraic topology, and the one we shall
be studying almost exclusively, is called singular homology. Since the technical appa-
ratus of singular homology is somewhat complicated, we will ﬁrst introduce a more
primitive version called simplicial homology in order to see how some of the apparatus
works in a simpler setting before beginning the general theory.
The natural domain of deﬁnition for simplicial homology is a class of spaces we
call ∆complexes, which are a mild generalization of the more classical notion of
a simplicial complex. Historically, the modern deﬁnition of singular homology was
ﬁrst given in [Eilenberg 1944], and ∆complexes were introduced soon thereafter in
[Eilenberg-Zilber 1950] where they were called semisimplicial complexes. Within a
few years this term came to be applied to what Eilenberg and Zilber called complete
semisimplicial complexes, and later there was yet another shift in terminology as
the latter objects came to be called simplicial sets. In theory this frees up the term
semisimplicial complex to have its original meaning, but to avoid potential confusion
it seems best to introduce a new name, and the term ∆complex has at least the virtue
of brevity.
∆–Complexes
The torus, the projective plane, and the Klein bottle can each be obtained from a
square by identifying opposite edges in the way indicated by the arrows in the follow-
ing ﬁgures:
b
b
a
a
c
v
v
v
v
U
L
b
b
a
a
c
w
v
w
v
U
L
b
b
a
a
c
v
v
v
v
U
L
RP
2
T
:
:
−−
K :
−−
−−−
Cutting a square along a diagonal produces two triangles, so each of these surfaces
can also be built from two triangles by identifying their edges in pairs. In similar
fashion a polygon with any number of sides can be cut along
diagonals into triangles, so in fact all closed surfaces can be
constructed from triangles by identifying edges. Thus we have
b
b
a
a
c
c
d
d
a single building block, the triangle, from which all surfaces can
be constructed. Using only triangles we could also construct a
large class of 2 dimensional spaces that are not surfaces in the
strict sense, by allowing more than two edges to be identiﬁed
together at a time.
