[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 1. The Fundamental Group
현재 소단원: 1.A.ex Exercises
직전 소단원: 「1.A Graphs and Free Groups」
[연습문제]
86
Chapter 1
The Fundamental Group
For each vertex v of X there is exactly one edge leading downward from v , so
by following these downward edges we obtain a path from v to the base vertex v0 .
This is an example of an edgepath, which is a composition of ﬁnitely many paths each
consisting of a single edge traversed monotonically. For any edgepath joining v to v0
other than the downward edgepath, the height function would not be monotone and
hence would have local maxima, occurring when the edgepath backtracked, retracing
some edge it had just crossed.
Thus in a tree there is a unique nonbacktracking
edgepath joining any two points. All the vertices and edges along this edgepath are
distinct.
A tree can contain no subgraph homeomorphic to a circle, since two vertices
in such a subgraph could be joined by more than one nonbacktracking edgepath.
Conversely, if a connected graph X contains no circle subgraph, then it must be a
tree. For if T is a maximal tree in X that is not equal to X , then the union of an edge
of X −T with the nonbacktracking edgepath in T joining the endpoints of this edge is
a circle subgraph of X . So if there are no circle subgraphs of X , we must have X = T ,
a tree.
For an arbitrary connected graph X and a pair of vertices v0 and v1 in X there is
a unique nonbacktracking edgepath in each homotopy class of paths from v0 to v1 .
This can be seen by lifting to the universal cover eX , which is a tree since it is simply-
connected. Choosing a lift ev0 of v0 , a homotopy class of paths from v0 to v1 lifts to
a homotopy class of paths starting at ev0 and ending at a unique lift ev1 of v1 . Then
the unique nonbacktracking edgepath in eX from ev0 to ev1 projects to the desired
nonbacktracking edgepath in X .
Exercises
1. Let X be a graph in which each vertex is an endpoint of only ﬁnitely many edges.
Show that the weak topology on X is a metric topology.
2. Show that a connected graph retracts onto any connected subgraph.
3.
For a ﬁnite graph X deﬁne the Euler characteristic χ(X) to be the number of
vertices minus the number of edges. Show that χ(X) = 1 if X is a tree, and that the
rank (number of elements in a basis) of π1(X) is 1 −χ(X) if X is connected.
4. If X is a ﬁnite graph and Y is a subgraph homeomorphic to S1 and containing the
basepoint x0 , show that π1(X, x0) has a basis in which one element is represented
by the loop Y .
5. Construct a connected graph X and maps f , g : X→X such that f g = 11 but f
and g do not induce isomorphisms on π1 . [Note that f∗g∗= 11 implies that f∗is
surjective and g∗is injective.]
6. Let F be the free group on two generators and let F′ be its commutator subgroup.
Find a set of free generators for F′ by considering the covering space of the graph
S1 ∨S1 corresponding to F′ .

K(G,1) Spaces and Graphs of Groups
Section 1.B
87
7. If F is a ﬁnitely generated free group and N is a nontrivial normal subgroup of
inﬁnite index, show, using covering spaces, that N is not ﬁnitely generated.
8. Show that a ﬁnitely generated group has only a ﬁnite number of subgroups of a
given ﬁnite index. [First do the case of free groups, using covering spaces of graphs.
The general case then follows since every group is a quotient group of a free group.]
9. Using covering spaces, show that an index n subgroup H of a group G has at most
n conjugate subgroups gHg−1 in G. Apply this to show that there exists a normal
subgroup K ⊂G of ﬁnite index with K ⊂H .
[For the latter statement, consider
the intersection of all the conjugate subgroups gHg−1 . This is the maximal normal
subgroup of G contained in H .]
10. Let X be the wedge sum of n circles, with its natural graph structure, and let
eX→X be a covering space with Y ⊂eX a ﬁnite connected subgraph. Show there is
a ﬁnite graph Z ⊃Y having the same vertices as Y , such that the projection Y→X
extends to a covering space Z→X .
11. Apply the two preceding problems to show that if F is a ﬁnitely generated free
group and x ∈F is not the identity element, then there is a normal subgroup H ⊂F
of ﬁnite index such that x ∉H . Hence x has nontrivial image in a ﬁnite quotient
group of F . In this situation one says F is residually ﬁnite.
12. Let F be a ﬁnitely generated free group, H ⊂F a ﬁnitely generated subgroup, and
x ∈F −H . Show there is a subgroup K of ﬁnite index in F such that K ⊃H and
x ∉K . [Apply Exercise 10.]
13. Let x be a nontrivial element of a ﬁnitely generated free group F . Show there is
a ﬁnite-index subgroup H ⊂F in which x is one element of a basis. [Exercises 4 and
10 may be helpful.]
14. Show that the existence of maximal trees is equivalent to the Axiom of Choice.
In this section we introduce a class of spaces whose homotopy type depends only
on their fundamental group. These spaces arise many places in topology, especially
in its interactions with group theory.
A path-connected space whose fundamental group is isomorphic to a given group
G and which has a contractible universal covering space is called a K(G,1) space. The
‘1’ here refers to π1 . More general K(G, n) spaces are studied in §4.2. All these spaces
are called Eilenberg–MacLane spaces, though in the case n = 1 they were studied by
