[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 1. The Fundamental Group
현재 소단원: 1.B K(G,1) Spaces and Graphs of Groups (분할 part 1)
직전 소단원: 「1.A.ex Exercises」
[본문]
K(G,1) Spaces and Graphs of Groups
Section 1.B
87
7. If F is a ﬁnitely generated free group and N is a nontrivial normal subgroup of
inﬁnite index, show, using covering spaces, that N is not ﬁnitely generated.
8. Show that a ﬁnitely generated group has only a ﬁnite number of subgroups of a
given ﬁnite index. [First do the case of free groups, using covering spaces of graphs.
The general case then follows since every group is a quotient group of a free group.]
9. Using covering spaces, show that an index n subgroup H of a group G has at most
n conjugate subgroups gHg−1 in G. Apply this to show that there exists a normal
subgroup K ⊂G of ﬁnite index with K ⊂H .
[For the latter statement, consider
the intersection of all the conjugate subgroups gHg−1 . This is the maximal normal
subgroup of G contained in H .]
10. Let X be the wedge sum of n circles, with its natural graph structure, and let
eX→X be a covering space with Y ⊂eX a ﬁnite connected subgraph. Show there is
a ﬁnite graph Z ⊃Y having the same vertices as Y , such that the projection Y→X
extends to a covering space Z→X .
11. Apply the two preceding problems to show that if F is a ﬁnitely generated free
group and x ∈F is not the identity element, then there is a normal subgroup H ⊂F
of ﬁnite index such that x ∉H . Hence x has nontrivial image in a ﬁnite quotient
group of F . In this situation one says F is residually ﬁnite.
12. Let F be a ﬁnitely generated free group, H ⊂F a ﬁnitely generated subgroup, and
x ∈F −H . Show there is a subgroup K of ﬁnite index in F such that K ⊃H and
x ∉K . [Apply Exercise 10.]
13. Let x be a nontrivial element of a ﬁnitely generated free group F . Show there is
a ﬁnite-index subgroup H ⊂F in which x is one element of a basis. [Exercises 4 and
10 may be helpful.]
14. Show that the existence of maximal trees is equivalent to the Axiom of Choice.
In this section we introduce a class of spaces whose homotopy type depends only
on their fundamental group. These spaces arise many places in topology, especially
in its interactions with group theory.
A path-connected space whose fundamental group is isomorphic to a given group
G and which has a contractible universal covering space is called a K(G,1) space. The
‘1’ here refers to π1 . More general K(G, n) spaces are studied in §4.2. All these spaces
are called Eilenberg–MacLane spaces, though in the case n = 1 they were studied by

88
Chapter 1
The Fundamental Group
Hurewicz before Eilenberg and MacLane took up the general case.
Here are some
examples:
Example 1B.1. S1 is a K(Z, 1). More generally, a connected graph is a K(G, 1) with
G a free group, since by the results of §1.A its universal cover is a tree, hence con-
tractible.
Example 1B.2. Closed surfaces with inﬁnite π1 , in other words, closed surfaces other
than S2 and RP2 , are K(G, 1)’s. This will be shown in Example 1B.14 below. It also
follows from the theorem in surface theory that the only simply-connected surfaces
without boundary are S2 and R2 , so the universal cover of a closed surface with
inﬁnite fundamental group must be R2 since it is noncompact. Nonclosed surfaces
deformation retract onto graphs, so such surfaces are K(G, 1)’s with G free.
Example 1B.3. The inﬁnite-dimensional projective space RP∞is a K(Z2, 1) since its
universal cover is S∞, which is contractible. To show the latter fact, a homotopy from
the identity map of S∞to a constant map can be constructed in two stages as follows.
First, deﬁne ft : R∞→R∞by ft(x1, x2, ···) = (1 −t)(x1, x2, ···) + t(0, x1, x2, ···).
This takes nonzero vectors to nonzero vectors for all t ∈[0, 1], so ft/|ft| gives a ho-
motopy from the identity map of S∞to the map (x1, x2, ···),(0, x1, x2, ···). Then a
homotopy from this map to a constant map is given by gt/|gt| where gt(x1, x2, ···) =
(1 −t)(0, x1, x2, ···) + t(1, 0, 0, ···).
Example 1B.4. Generalizing the preceding example, we can construct a K(Zm, 1) as
an inﬁnite-dimensional lens space S∞/Zm , where Zm acts on S∞, regarded as the
unit sphere in C∞, by scalar multiplication by mth roots of unity, a generator of this
action being the map (z1, z2, ···) , e2πi/m(z1, z2, ···). It is not hard to check that
this is a covering space action.
Example 1B.5. A product K(G, 1)×K(H, 1) is a K(G×H, 1) since its universal cover
is the product of the universal covers of K(G, 1) and K(H, 1). By taking products of
circles and inﬁnite-dimensional lens spaces we therefore get K(G, 1)’s for arbitrary
ﬁnitely generated abelian groups G. For example the n dimensional torus T n , the
product of n circles, is a K(Zn, 1).
Example 1B.6. For a closed connected subspace K of S3 that is nonempty, the com-
plement S3−K is a K(G, 1). This is a theorem in 3 manifold theory, but in the special
case that K is a torus knot the result follows from our study of torus knot comple-
ments in Examples 1.24 and 1.35. Namely, we showed that for K the torus knot Km,n
there is a deformation retraction of S3 −K onto a certain 2 dimensional complex
Xm,n having contractible universal cover. The homotopy lifting property then implies
that the universal cover of S3 −K is homotopy equivalent to the universal cover of
Xm,n , hence is also contractible.

K(G,1) Spaces and Graphs of Groups
Section 1.B
89
Example 1B.7. It is not hard to construct a K(G, 1) for an arbitrary group G, us-
ing the notion of a ∆complex deﬁned in §2.1.
Let EG be the ∆complex whose
n simplices are the ordered (n + 1) tuples [g0, ··· , gn] of elements of G. Such an
n simplex attaches to the (n −1) simplices [g0, ··· , bgi, ··· , gn] in the obvious way,
just as a standard simplex attaches to its faces. (The notation bgi means that this
vertex is deleted.) The complex EG is contractible by the homotopy ht that slides
each point x ∈[g0, ··· , gn] along the line segment in [e, g0, ··· , gn] from x to the
vertex [e], where e is the identity element of G. This is well-deﬁned in EG since
when we restrict to a face [g0, ··· , bgi, ··· , gn] we have the linear deformation to [e]
in [e, g0, ··· , bgi, ··· , gn]. Note that ht carries [e] around the loop [e, e], so ht is not
actually a deformation retraction of EG onto [e].
The group G acts on EG by left multiplication, an element g ∈G taking the
simplex [g0, ··· , gn] linearly onto the simplex [gg0, ··· , ggn]. Only the identity e
takes any simplex to itself, so by an exercise at the end of this section, the action
of G on EG is a covering space action. Hence the quotient map EG→EG/G is the
universal cover of the orbit space BG = EG/G, and BG is a K(G, 1).
Since G acts on EG by freely permuting simplices, BG inherits a ∆complex
structure from EG. The action of G on EG identiﬁes all the vertices of EG, so BG
has just one vertex. To describe the ∆complex structure on BG explicitly, note ﬁrst
that every n simplex of EG can be written uniquely in the form
[g0, g0g1, g0g1g2, ··· , g0g1 ··· gn] = g0[e, g1, g1g2, ··· , g1 ··· gn]
The image of this simplex in BG may be denoted unambiguously by the symbol
[g1|g2| ··· |gn].
In this ‘bar’ notation the gi ’s and their ordered products can be
used to label edges, viewing an
edge label as the ratio between
the two labels on the vertices
at the endpoints of the edge,
as indicated in the ﬁgure. With
g
g
g
0
g0
g3
g3
g0
1
g1
g1
g0g1
g0g1
2
g
g0g1
2
g
g0g1
2
g3
g2
g3
g
g1
2
g
g1
2
g2
g2
g
g1
2
this notation, the boundary of
a simplex [g1| ··· |gn] of BG
consists of the simplices [g2| ··· |gn], [g1| ··· |gn−1], and [g1| ··· |gigi+1| ··· |gn]
for i = 1, ··· , n −1.
This construction of a K(G, 1) produces a rather large space, since BG is al-
ways inﬁnite-dimensional, and if G is inﬁnite, BG has an inﬁnite number of cells in
each positive dimension. For example, BZ is much bigger than S1 , the most efﬁcient
K(Z, 1). On the other hand, BG has the virtue of being functorial: A homomorphism
f : G→H induces a map Bf : BG→BH sending a simplex [g1| ··· |gn] to the simplex
[f(g1)| ··· |f (gn)]. A different construction of a K(G, 1) is given in §4.2. Here one
starts with any 2 dimensional complex having fundamental group G, for example

90
Chapter 1
The Fundamental Group
the complex XG associated to a presentation of G, and then one attaches cells of di-
mension 3 and higher to make the universal cover contractible without affecting π1 .
In general, it is hard to get any control on the number of higher-dimensional cells
needed in this construction, so it too can be rather inefﬁcient. Indeed, ﬁnding an
efﬁcient K(G, 1) for a given group G is often a difﬁcult problem.
It is a curious and almost paradoxical fact that if G contains any elements of ﬁnite
order, then every K(G, 1) CW complex must be inﬁnite-dimensional. This is shown
in Proposition 2.45. In particular the inﬁnite-dimensional lens space K(Zm, 1)’s in
Example 1B.4 cannot be replaced by any ﬁnite-dimensional complex.
In spite of the great latitude possible in the construction of K(G, 1)’s, there is a
very nice homotopical uniqueness property that accounts for much of the interest in
K(G, 1)’s:
Theorem 1B.8. The homotopy type of a CW complex K(G, 1) is uniquely determined
by G.
Having a unique homotopy type of K(G, 1)’s associated to each group G means
that algebraic invariants of spaces that depend only on homotopy type, such as ho-
mology and cohomology groups, become invariants of groups. This has proved to be a
quite fruitful idea, and has been much studied both from the algebraic and topological
viewpoints. The discussion following Proposition 2.45 gives a few references.
The preceding theorem will follow easily from:
Proposition 1B.9. Let X be a connected CW complex and let Y be a K(G, 1). Then
every homomorphism π1(X, x0)→π1(Y, y0) is induced by a map (X, x0)→(Y, y0)
that is unique up to homotopy ﬁxing x0 .
To deduce the theorem from this, let X and Y be CW complex K(G, 1)’s with iso-
morphic fundamental groups. The proposition gives maps f : (X, x0)→(Y, y0) and
g : (Y, y0)→(X, x0) inducing inverse isomorphisms π1(X, x0) ≈π1(Y, y0). Then f g
and gf induce the identity on π1 and hence are homotopic to the identity maps.
Proof of 1B.9: Let us ﬁrst consider the case that X has a single 0 cell, the base-
point x0 . Given a homomorphism ϕ : π1(X, x0)→π1(Y, y0), we begin the construc-
tion of a map f : (X, x0)→(Y, y0) with f∗= ϕ by setting f (x0) = y0 . Each 1 cell
e1
α of X has closure a circle determining an element
[e1
α] ∈π1(X, x0), and we let f on the closure of e1
α
X
π1
1
0
(
)
x
ϕ
∗
,
X
π1
0
(
)
x
,
Y
π1
0
(
)
y
,
f
∗
i
−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−−→
be a map representing ϕ([e1
α]). If i : X1>X denotes
the inclusion, then ϕi∗= f∗since π1(X1, x0) is gen-
erated by the elements [e1
α].
To extend f over a cell e2
β with attaching map ψβ : S1→X1 , all we need is for the
composition f ψβ to be nullhomotopic. Choosing a basepoint s0 ∈S1 and a path in X1
from ψβ(s0) to x0 , ψβ determines an element [ψβ] ∈π1(X1, x0), and the existence

K(G,1) Spaces and Graphs of Groups
Section 1.B
91
of a nullhomotopy of f ψβ is equivalent to f∗([ψβ]) being zero in π1(Y, y0). We
have i∗([ψβ]) = 0 since the cell e2
β provides a nullhomotopy of ψβ in X . Hence
f∗([ψβ]) = ϕi∗([ψβ]) = 0, and so f can be extended over e2
β .
Extending f inductively over cells en
γ with n > 2 is possible since the attaching
maps ψγ : Sn−1→Xn−1 have nullhomotopic compositions f ψγ : Sn−1→Y .
This is
because f ψγ lifts to the universal cover of Y if n > 2, and this cover is contractible
by hypothesis, so the lift of f ψγ is nullhomotopic, hence also f ψγ itself.
Turning to the uniqueness statement, if two maps f0, f1 : (X, x0)→(Y, y0) in-
duce the same homomorphism on π1 , then we see immediately that their restrictions
to X1 are homotopic, ﬁxing x0 .
To extend the resulting map X1×I ∪X×∂I→Y
over the remaining cells en×(0, 1) of X×I we can proceed just as in the preceding
paragraph since these cells have dimension n + 1 > 2. Thus we obtain a homotopy
ft : (X, x0)→(Y, y0), ﬁnishing the proof in the case that X has a single 0 cell.
The case that X has more than one 0 cell can be treated by a small elaboration
on this argument. Choose a maximal tree T ⊂X . To construct a map f realizing a
given ϕ, begin by setting f (T) = y0 . Then each edge e1
α in X −T determines an
element [e1
α] ∈π1(X, x0), and we let f on the closure of e1
α be a map representing
ϕ([e1
α]). Extending f over higher-dimensional cells then proceeds just as before.
Constructing a homotopy ft joining two given maps f0 and f1 with f0∗= f1∗also
has an extra step. Let ht : X1→X1 be a homotopy starting with h0 = 11 and restricting
to a deformation retraction of T onto x0 . (It is easy to extend such a deformation
retraction to a homotopy deﬁned on all of X1 .) We can construct a homotopy from
f0|X1 to f1|X1 by ﬁrst deforming f0|X1 and f1|X1 to take T to y0 by composing with
ht , then applying the earlier argument to obtain a homotopy between the modiﬁed
f0|X1 and f1|X1 . Having a homotopy f0|X1 ≃f1|X1 we extend this over all of X in
the same way as before.
⊔⊓
The ﬁrst part of the preceding proof also works for the 2 dimensional complexes
XG associated to presentations of groups. Thus every homomorphism G→H is re-
alized as the induced homomorphism of some map XG→XH . However, there is no
uniqueness statement for this map, and it can easily happen that different presenta-
tions of a group G give XG ’s that are not homotopy equivalent.
Graphs of Groups
As an illustration of how K(G, 1) spaces can be useful in group theory, we shall
describe a procedure for assembling a collection of K(G, 1)’s together into a K(G, 1)
for a larger group G. Group-theoretically, this gives a method for assembling smaller
groups together to form a larger group, generalizing the notion of free products.
Let Γ be a graph that is connected and oriented, that is, its edges are viewed as
arrows, each edge having a speciﬁed direction. Suppose that at each vertex v of Γ we

92
Chapter 1
The Fundamental Group
place a group Gv and along each edge e of Γ we put a homomorphism ϕe from the
group at the tail of the edge to the group at the head of the edge. We call this data a
graph of groups. Now build a space BΓ by putting the space BGv from Example 1B.7
at each vertex v of Γ and then ﬁlling in a mapping cylinder of the map Bϕe along
each edge e of Γ , identifying the two ends of the mapping cylinder with the two BGv ’s
at the ends of e. The resulting space BΓ is then a CW complex since the maps Bϕe
take n cells homeomorphically onto n cells. In fact, the cell structure on BΓ can be
canonically subdivided into a ∆complex structure using the prism construction from
the proof of Theorem 2.10, but we will not need to do this here.
More generally, instead of BGv one could take any CW complex K(Gv, 1) at the
vertex v , and then along edges put mapping cylinders of maps realizing the homo-
morphisms ϕe . We leave it for the reader to check that the resulting space KΓ is
homotopy equivalent to the BΓ constructed above.
Example 1B.10. Suppose Γ consists of one central vertex with a number of edges
radiating out from it, and the group Gv at this central vertex is trivial, hence also all
the edge homomorphisms. Then van Kampen’s theorem implies that π1(KΓ) is the
free product of the groups at all the outer vertices.
In view of this example, we shall call π1(KΓ) for a general graph of groups Γ the
graph product of the vertex groups Gv with respect to the edge homomorphisms ϕe .
The name for π1(KΓ) that is generally used in the literature is the rather awkward
phrase, ‘the fundamental group of the graph of groups.’
Here is the main result we shall prove about graphs of groups:
Theorem 1B.11. If all the edge homomorphisms ϕe are injective, then KΓ is a
K(G, 1) and the inclusions K(Gv, 1) > KΓ induce injective maps on π1 .
Before giving the proof, let us look at some interesting special cases:
Example 1B.12: Free Products with Amalgamation. Suppose the graph of groups is
A←C→B , with the two maps monomorphisms. One can regard this data as speci-
fying embeddings of C as subgroups of A and B . Applying van Kampen’s theorem
to the decomposition of KΓ into its two mapping cylinders, we see that π1(KΓ) is
the quotient of A ∗B obtained by identifying the subgroup C ⊂A with the subgroup
C ⊂B . The standard notation for this group is A ∗C B , the free product of A and
B amalgamated along the subgroup C . According to the theorem, A ∗C B contains
both A and B as subgroups.
For example, a free product with amalgamation Z ∗Z Z can be realized by map-
ping cylinders of the maps S1←S1→S1 that are m sheeted and n sheeted covering
spaces, respectively. We studied this case in Examples 1.24 and 1.35 where we showed
that the complex KΓ is a deformation retract of the complement of a torus knot in
S3 if m and n are relatively prime. It is a basic result in 3 manifold theory that the

K(G,1) Spaces and Graphs of Groups
Section 1.B
93
complement of every smooth knot in S3 can be built up by iterated graph of groups
constructions with injective edge homomorphisms, starting with free groups, so the
theorem implies that these knot complements are K(G, 1)’s. Their universal covers
are all R3 , in fact.
Example 1B.13: HNN Extensions. Consider a graph of groups C
A
ψ
ϕ
with ϕ
and ψ both monomorphisms. This is analogous to the previous case A←C→B ,
but with the two groups A and B coalesced to a single group. The group π1(KΓ),
which was denoted A ∗C B in the previous case, is now denoted A∗C . To see what
this group looks like, let us regard KΓ as being obtained from K(A, 1) by attaching
K(C, 1)×I along the two ends K(C, 1)×∂I via maps realizing the monomorphisms
ϕ and ψ. Using a K(C, 1) with a single 0 cell, we see that KΓ can be obtained from
K(A, 1) ∨S1 by attaching cells of dimension two and greater, so π1(KΓ) is a quotient
of A∗Z, and it is not hard to ﬁgure out that the relations deﬁning this quotient are of
the form tϕ(c)t−1 = ψ(c) where t is a generator of the Z factor and c ranges over
C , or a set of generators for C . We leave the veriﬁcation of this for the Exercises.
As a very special case, taking ϕ = ψ = 11 gives A∗A = A×Z since we can take
KΓ = K(A, 1)×S1 in this case. More generally, taking ϕ = 11 with ψ an arbitrary
automorphism of A, we realize any semidirect product of A and Z as A∗A .
For
example, the Klein bottle occurs this way, with ϕ realized by the identity map of S1
and ψ by a reﬂection. In these cases when ϕ = 11 we could realize the same group
π1(KΓ) using a slightly simpler graph of groups, with a single vertex, labeled A, and
a single edge, labeled ψ.
Here is another special case. Suppose we take a torus, delete a small open disk,
then identify the resulting boundary circle with a longitudinal circle of the torus. This
produces a space X that happens to be homeomorphic to a subspace of the stan-
dard picture of a Klein bottle in R3 ; see Exercise 12 of §1.2. The fundamental group
π1(X) has the form (Z ∗Z) ∗Z Z with the deﬁning relation tb±1t−1 = aba−1b−1
where a is a meridional loop and b is a longitudinal loop on the torus. The sign
of the exponent in the term b±1 is immaterial since the two ways of glueing the
boundary circle to the longitude produce homeomorphic spaces. The group π1(X) =

a, b, t |||| tbt−1aba−1b−1 
abelianizes to Z×Z, but to show that π1(X) is not iso-
morphic to Z ∗Z takes some work. There is a surjection π1(X)→Z ∗Z obtained by
setting b = 1. This has nontrivial kernel since b is nontrivial in π1(X) by the pre-
ceding theorem. If π1(X) were isomorphic to Z ∗Z we would then have a surjective
homomorphism Z ∗Z→Z ∗Z that was not an isomorphism. However, it is a theorem
in group theory that a free group F is hopﬁan — every surjective homomorphism
F→F must be injective. Hence π1(X) is not free.
Example 1B.14: Closed Surfaces. A closed orientable surface M of genus two or
greater can be cut along a circle into two compact surfaces M1 and M2 such that the
