[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 1. The Fundamental Group
현재 소단원: 1.B K(G,1) Spaces and Graphs of Groups (분할 part 2)
직전 소단원: 「1.A.ex Exercises」
[본문]
94
Chapter 1
The Fundamental Group
closed surfaces obtained from M1 and M2 by ﬁlling in their boundary circle with a
disk have smaller genus than M . Each of M1 and M2 is the mapping cylinder of a
map from S1 to a ﬁnite graph. Namely, view Mi as obtained from a closed surface
by deleting an open disk in the interior of the 2 cell in the standard CW structure
described in Chapter 0, so that Mi becomes the mapping cylinder of the attaching
map of the 2 cell. This attaching map is not nullhomotopic, so it induces an injection
on π1 since free groups are torsionfree. Thus we have realized the original surface
M as KΓ for Γ a graph of groups of the form F1←--- Z -→F2 with F1 and F2 free and
the two maps injective. The theorem then says that M is a K(G, 1).
A similar argument works for closed nonorientable surfaces other than RP2 . For
example, the Klein bottle is obtained from two M¨obius bands by identifying their
boundary circles, and a M¨obius band is the mapping cylinder of the 2 sheeted covering
space S1→S1 .
Proof of 1B.11: We shall construct a covering space eK→KΓ by gluing together copies
of the universal covering spaces of the various mapping cylinders in KΓ in such a way
that eK will be contractible. Hence eK will be the universal cover of KΓ , which will
therefore be a K(G, 1).
First a preliminary observation: Given a universal covering space p : eX→X and a
connected, locally path-connected subspace A ⊂X such that the inclusion A>X in-
duces an injection on π1 , then each component eA of p−1(A) is a universal cover of A.
To see this, note that p : eA→A is a covering space, so the induced map π1( eA)→π1(A)
is injective, and this map factors through π1( eX) = 0, hence π1( eA) = 0. For exam-
ple, if X is the torus S1×S1 and A is the circle S1×{x0}, then p−1(A) consists of
inﬁnitely many parallel lines in R2 , each of which is a universal cover of A.
For a map f : A→B between connected CW complexes, let p : f
Mf→Mf be the
universal cover of the mapping cylinder Mf . Then f
Mf is itself the mapping cylinder
of a map ef : p−1(A)→p−1(B) since the line segments in the mapping cylinder struc-
ture on Mf lift to line segments in f
Mf deﬁning a mapping cylinder structure. Since
f
Mf is a mapping cylinder, it deformation retracts onto p−1(B), so p−1(B) is also
simply-connected, hence is the universal cover of B . If f induces an injection on π1 ,
then the remarks in the preceding paragraph apply, and the components of p−1(A)
are universal covers of A. If we assume further that A and B are K(G, 1)’s, then f
Mf
and the components of p−1(A) are contractible, and we claim that f
Mf deformation
retracts onto each component eA of A. Namely, the inclusion eA > f
Mf is a homo-
topy equivalence since both spaces are contractible, and then Corollary 0.20 implies
that f
Mf deformation retracts onto eA since the pair (f
Mf , eA) satisﬁes the homotopy
extension property, as shown in Example 0.15.
Now we can describe the construction of the covering space eK of KΓ . It will be
the union of an increasing sequence of spaces eK1 ⊂eK2 ⊂···. For the ﬁrst stage,
let eK1 be the universal cover of one of the mapping cylinders Mf of KΓ .
By the

K(G,1) Spaces and Graphs of Groups
Section 1.B
95
preceding remarks, this contains various disjoint copies of universal covers of the
two K(Gv, 1)’s at the ends of Mf . We build eK2 from eK1 by attaching to each of these
universal covers of K(Gv, 1)’s a copy of the universal cover of each mapping cylinder
Mg of KΓ meeting Mf at the end of Mf in question.
Now repeat the process to
construct eK3 by attaching universal covers of mapping cylinders at all the universal
covers of K(Gv, 1)’s created in the previous step. In the same way, we construct eKn+1
from eKn for all n, and then we set eK =
S
n eKn .
Note that eKn+1 deformation retracts onto eKn since it is formed by attaching
pieces to eKn that deformation retract onto the subspaces along which they attach,
by our earlier remarks. It follows that eK is contractible since we can deformation
retract eKn+1 onto eKn during the time interval [1/2n+1, 1/2n], and then ﬁnish with a
contraction of eK1 to a point during the time interval [1/2, 1].
The natural projection eK→KΓ is clearly a covering space, so this ﬁnishes the
proof that KΓ is a K(G, 1).
The remaining statement that each inclusion K(Gv, 1)>KΓ induces an injection
on π1 can easily be deduced from the preceding constructions. For suppose a loop
γ : S1→K(Gv, 1) is nullhomotopic in KΓ . By the lifting criterion for covering spaces,
there is a lift eγ : S1→eK . This has image contained in one of the copies of the universal
cover of K(Gv, 1), so eγ is nullhomotopic in this universal cover, and hence γ is
nullhomotopic in K(Gv, 1).
⊔⊓
The various mapping cylinders that make up the universal cover of KΓ are ar-
ranged in a treelike pattern. The tree in question, call it T Γ , has one vertex for each
copy of a universal cover of a K(Gv, 1) in eK , and two vertices are joined by an edge
whenever the two universal covers of K(Gv, 1)’s corresponding to these vertices are
connected by a line segment lifting a line segment in the mapping cylinder structure of
a mapping cylinder of KΓ . The inductive construction of eK is reﬂected in an inductive
construction of T Γ as a union of an increasing sequence of subtrees T1 ⊂T2 ⊂···.
Corresponding to eK1 is a subtree T1 ⊂T Γ consisting of a central vertex with a number
of edges radiating out from it, an ‘asterisk’ with possibly an inﬁnite number of edges.
When we enlarge eK1 to eK2 , T1 is correspondingly enlarged to a tree T2 by attaching
a similar asterisk at the end of each outer vertex of T1 , and each subsequent enlarge-
ment is handled in the same way. The action of π1(KΓ) on eK as deck transformations
induces an action on T Γ , permuting its vertices and edges, and the orbit space of T Γ
under this action is just the original graph Γ . The action on T Γ will not generally
be a free action since the elements of a subgroup Gv ⊂π1(KΓ) ﬁx the vertex of T Γ
corresponding to one of the universal covers of K(Gv, 1).
There is in fact an exact correspondence between graphs of groups and groups
acting on trees. See [Scott & Wall 1979] for an exposition of this rather nice theory.
From the viewpoint of groups acting on trees, the deﬁnition of a graph of groups is

96
Chapter 1
The Fundamental Group
usually taken to be slightly more restrictive than the one we have given here, namely,
one considers only oriented graphs obtained from an unoriented graph by subdividing
each edge by adding a vertex at its midpoint, then orienting the two resulting edges
outward, away from the new vertex.
Exercises
1. Suppose a group G acts simplicially on a ∆complex X , where ‘simplicially’ means
that each element of G takes each simplex of X onto another simplex by a linear
homeomorphism. If the action is free, show it is a covering space action.
2. Let X be a connected CW complex and G a group such that every homomorphism
π1(X)→G is trivial. Show that every map X→K(G, 1) is nullhomotopic.
3. Show that every graph product of trivial groups is free.
4. Use van Kampen’s theorem to compute A∗C as a quotient of A ∗Z, as stated in
the text.
5. Consider the graph of groups Γ having one vertex, Z, and one edge, the map Z→Z
that is multiplication by 2, realized by the 2 sheeted covering space S1→S1 . Show
that π1(KΓ) has presentation

a, b |||| bab−1a−2 
and describe the universal cover
of KΓ explicitly as a product T ×R with T a tree. [The group π1(KΓ) is the ﬁrst in
a family of groups called Baumslag-Solitar groups, having presentations of the form

a, b |||| bamb−1a−n 
. These are HNN extensions Z∗Z .]
6. Show that for a graph of groups all of whose edge homomorphisms are injective
maps Z→Z, we can choose KΓ to have universal cover a product T ×R with T a
tree. Work out in detail the case that the graph of groups is the inﬁnite sequence
Z
2--→Z
3--→Z
4--→Z -→··· where the map Z
n--→Z is multiplication by n. Show
that π1(KΓ) is isomorphic to Q in this case. How would one modify this example
to get π1(KΓ) isomorphic to the subgroup of Q consisting of rational numbers with
denominator a power of 2?
7. Show that every graph product of groups can be realized by a graph whose vertices
are partitioned into two subsets, with every oriented edge going from a vertex in the
ﬁrst subset to a vertex in the second subset.
8. Show that a ﬁnite graph product of ﬁnitely generated groups is ﬁnitely generated,
and similarly for ﬁnitely presented groups.
9. Show that a ﬁnite graph product of ﬁnite groups has a free subgroup of ﬁnite
index, by constructing a ﬁnite-sheeted covering space of KΓ from universal covers of
the mapping cylinders of KΓ . [The converse is also true for ﬁnitely generated groups;
see [Scott & Wall 1979] for more on this.]
