[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 1. The Fundamental Group
현재 소단원: 1.B.ex Exercises
직전 소단원: 「1.B K(G,1) Spaces and Graphs of Groups」
[연습문제]
96
Chapter 1
The Fundamental Group
usually taken to be slightly more restrictive than the one we have given here, namely,
one considers only oriented graphs obtained from an unoriented graph by subdividing
each edge by adding a vertex at its midpoint, then orienting the two resulting edges
outward, away from the new vertex.
Exercises
1. Suppose a group G acts simplicially on a ∆complex X , where ‘simplicially’ means
that each element of G takes each simplex of X onto another simplex by a linear
homeomorphism. If the action is free, show it is a covering space action.
2. Let X be a connected CW complex and G a group such that every homomorphism
π1(X)→G is trivial. Show that every map X→K(G, 1) is nullhomotopic.
3. Show that every graph product of trivial groups is free.
4. Use van Kampen’s theorem to compute A∗C as a quotient of A ∗Z, as stated in
the text.
5. Consider the graph of groups Γ having one vertex, Z, and one edge, the map Z→Z
that is multiplication by 2, realized by the 2 sheeted covering space S1→S1 . Show
that π1(KΓ) has presentation

a, b |||| bab−1a−2 
and describe the universal cover
of KΓ explicitly as a product T ×R with T a tree. [The group π1(KΓ) is the ﬁrst in
a family of groups called Baumslag-Solitar groups, having presentations of the form

a, b |||| bamb−1a−n 
. These are HNN extensions Z∗Z .]
6. Show that for a graph of groups all of whose edge homomorphisms are injective
maps Z→Z, we can choose KΓ to have universal cover a product T ×R with T a
tree. Work out in detail the case that the graph of groups is the inﬁnite sequence
Z
2--→Z
3--→Z
4--→Z -→··· where the map Z
n--→Z is multiplication by n. Show
that π1(KΓ) is isomorphic to Q in this case. How would one modify this example
to get π1(KΓ) isomorphic to the subgroup of Q consisting of rational numbers with
denominator a power of 2?
7. Show that every graph product of groups can be realized by a graph whose vertices
are partitioned into two subsets, with every oriented edge going from a vertex in the
ﬁrst subset to a vertex in the second subset.
8. Show that a ﬁnite graph product of ﬁnitely generated groups is ﬁnitely generated,
and similarly for ﬁnitely presented groups.
9. Show that a ﬁnite graph product of ﬁnite groups has a free subgroup of ﬁnite
index, by constructing a ﬁnite-sheeted covering space of KΓ from universal covers of
the mapping cylinders of KΓ . [The converse is also true for ﬁnitely generated groups;
see [Scott & Wall 1979] for more on this.]

The fundamental group π1(X) is especially useful when studying spaces of low
dimension, as one would expect from its deﬁnition which involves only maps from
low-dimensional spaces into X , namely loops I→X and homotopies of loops, maps
I×I→X . The deﬁnition in terms of objects that are at most 2 dimensional manifests
itself for example in the fact that when X is a CW complex, π1(X) depends only on
the 2 skeleton of X . In view of the low-dimensional nature of the fundamental group,
we should not expect it to be a very reﬁned tool for dealing with high-dimensional
spaces. Thus it cannot distinguish between spheres Sn with n ≥2. This limitation
to low dimensions can be removed by considering the natural higher-dimensional
analogs of π1(X), the homotopy groups πn(X), which are deﬁned in terms of maps
of the n dimensional cube In into X and homotopies In×I→X of such maps. Not
surprisingly, when X is a CW complex, πn(X) depends only on the (n + 1) skeleton
of X . And as one might hope, homotopy groups do indeed distinguish spheres of all
dimensions since πi(Sn) is 0 for i < n and Z for i = n.
However, the higher-dimensional homotopy groups have the serious drawback
that they are extremely difﬁcult to compute in general. Even for simple spaces like
spheres, the calculation of πi(Sn) for i > n turns out to be a huge problem. For-
tunately there is a more computable alternative to homotopy groups: the homology
groups Hn(X). Like πn(X), the homology group Hn(X) for a CW complex X de-
pends only on the (n + 1) skeleton. For spheres, the homology groups Hi(Sn) are
isomorphic to the homotopy groups πi(Sn) in the range 1 ≤i ≤n, but homology
groups have the advantage that Hi(Sn) = 0 for i > n.
The computability of homology groups does not come for free, unfortunately.
The deﬁnition of homology groups is decidedly less transparent than the deﬁnition
of homotopy groups, and once one gets beyond the deﬁnition there is a certain amount
of technical machinery to be set up before any real calculations and applications can
be given. In the exposition below we approach the deﬁnition of Hn(X) by two prelim-
inary stages, ﬁrst giving a few motivating examples nonrigorously, then constructing
