[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 2. Homology
현재 소단원: 2.B.ex Exercises
직전 소단원: 「2.B Classical Applications」
[연습문제]
176
Chapter 2
Homology
In particular we deduce that the map f∗: Hn(Sn; Z2)→Hn(Sn; Z2) is an isomor-
phism. By Lemma 2.49 this map is multiplication by the degree of f mod 2, so the
degree of f must be odd.
⊔⊓
The fact that odd maps have odd degree easily implies the Borsuk–Ulam theorem:
Corollary 2B.7. For every map g : Sn→Rn there exists a point x ∈Sn with g(x) =
g(−x).
Proof: Let f (x) = g(x) −g(−x), so f is odd. We need to show that f (x) = 0 for
some x . If this is not the case, we can replace f (x) by f (x)/|f (x)| to get a new
map f : Sn→Sn−1 which is still odd. The restriction of this f to the equator Sn−1
then has odd degree by the proposition. But this restriction is nullhomotopic via the
restriction of f to one of the hemispheres bounded by Sn−1 .
⊔⊓
Exercises
1. Compute Hi(Sn −X) when X is a subspace of Sn homeomorphic to Sk ∨Sℓor to
Sk ⨿Sℓ.
2. Show that eHi(Sn −X) ≈eHn−i−1(X) when X is homeomorphic to a ﬁnite connected
graph. [First do the case that the graph is a tree.]
3. Let (D, S) ⊂(Dn, Sn−1) be a pair of subspaces homeomorphic to (Dk, Sk−1), with
D ∩Sn−1 = S .
Show the inclusion Sn−1 −S > Dn −D induces an isomorphism
on homology.
[Glue two copies of (Dn, D) together along (Sn−1, S) and examine
the Mayer–Vietoris sequence for the complement of the resulting k sphere in Sn ,
decomposed into two copies of Dn −D.]
4. In the unit sphere Sp+q−1 ⊂Rp+q let Sp−1 and Sq−1 be the subspheres consisting
of points whose last q and ﬁrst p coordinates are zero, respectively.
(a) Show that Sp+q−1 −Sp−1 deformation retracts onto Sq−1 , and is in fact homeo-
morphic to Sq−1×Rp .
(b) Show that Sp−1 and Sq−1 are not the boundaries of any pair of disjointly embedded
disks Dp and Dq in Dp+q . [The preceding exercise may be useful.]
5. Let S be an embedded k sphere in Sn for which there exists a disk Dn ⊂Sn
intersecting S in the disk Dk ⊂Dn deﬁned by the ﬁrst k coordinates of Dn . Let
Dn−k ⊂Dn be the disk deﬁned by the last n −k coordinates, with boundary sphere
Sn−k−1 . Show that the inclusion Sn−k−1>Sn −S induces an isomorphism on homol-
ogy groups.
6. Modify the construction of the Alexander horned sphere to produce an embedding
S2 > R3 for which neither component of R3 −S2 is simply-connected.

Simplicial Approximation
Section 2.C
177
7. Analyze what happens when the number of handles in the basic
building block for the Alexander horned sphere is doubled, as in
the ﬁgure at the right.
8.
Show that R2n+1 is not a division algebra over R if n > 0
by showing that if it were, then for nonzero a ∈R2n+1 the map
S2n→S2n , x , ax/|ax| would be homotopic to x , −ax/|ax|,
but these maps have different degrees.
9. Make the transfer sequence explicit in the case of a trivial covering eX→X , where
eX = X×S0 .
10. Use the transfer sequence for the covering S∞→RP∞to compute Hn(RP∞; Z2).
11. Use the transfer sequence for the covering X×S∞→X×RP∞to produce isomor-
phisms Hn(X×RP∞; Z2) ≈
L
i≤n Hi(X; Z2) for all n.
Many spaces of interest in algebraic topology can be given the structure of sim-
plicial complexes, and early in the history of the subject this structure was exploited
as one of the main technical tools. Later, CW complexes largely superseded simplicial
complexes in this role, but there are still some occasions when the extra structure of
simplicial complexes can be quite useful. This will be illustrated nicely by the proof
of the classical Lefschetz ﬁxed point theorem in this section.
One of the good features of simplicial complexes is that arbitrary continuous
maps between them can always be deformed to maps that are linear on the simplices
of some subdivision of the domain complex. This is the idea of ‘simplicial approxi-
mation,’ developed by Brouwer and Alexander before 1920. Here is the relevant def-
inition: If K and L are simplicial complexes, then a map f : K→L is simplicial if it
sends each simplex of K to a simplex of L by a linear map taking vertices to ver-
tices. In barycentric coordinates, a linear map of a simplex [v0, ··· , vn] has the form
P
i tivi ,
P
i tif (vi). Since a linear map from a simplex to a simplex is uniquely
determined by its values on vertices, this means that a simplicial map is uniquely
determined by its values on vertices. It is easy to see that a map from the vertices
of K to the vertices of L extends to a simplicial map iff it sends the vertices of each
simplex of K to the vertices of some simplex of L.
Here is the most basic form of the Simplicial Approximation Theorem:
Theorem 2C.1. If K is a ﬁnite simplicial complex and L is an arbitrary simplicial
complex, then any map f : K→L is homotopic to a map that is simplicial with respect
to some iterated barycentric subdivision of K .
