[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 2. Homology
현재 소단원: 2.C.ex Exercises
직전 소단원: 「2.C Simplicial Approximation」
[연습문제]
184
Chapter 2
Homology
simplicial subcomplex Sn
α homeomorphic to Sn at one end of M(fα), and the homeo-
morphism Sn ≈Sn
α is homotopic in Wn to the map fα , hence also to ϕα . Let Zn+1 be
obtained from Zn by attaching Dn+1
α
×I ’s via these homotopies between the ϕα ’s and
the inclusions Sn
α>Wn . Thus Zn+1 contains Xn+1 at one end, and at the other end we
have a simplicial complex Yn+1 = Yn
S
α C(fα), where C(fα) is obtained from M(fα)
by attaching a cone on the subcomplex Sn
α . Since Dn+1×I deformation retracts onto
∂Dn+1×I ∪Dn+1×{1}, we see that Zn+1 deformation retracts onto Zn ∪Yn+1 , which
in turn deformation retracts onto Yn ∪Yn+1 = Yn+1 by induction. Likewise, Zn+1
deformation retracts onto Xn+1 ∪Wn which deformation retracts onto Xn+1 ∪Zn and
hence onto Xn+1 ∪Xn = Xn+1 by induction.
Let Y =
S
n Yn and Z =
S
n Zn . The deformation retractions of Zn onto Xn
give deformation retractions of X ∪Zn onto X , and the inﬁnite concatenation of the
latter deformation retractions is a deformation retraction of Z onto X . Similarly, Z
deformation retracts onto Y .
⊔⊓
Exercises
1. What is the minimum number of edges in simplicial complex structures K and L
on S1 such that there is a simplicial map K→L of degree n?
2. Use the Lefschetz ﬁxed point theorem to show that a map Sn→Sn has a ﬁxed
point unless its degree is equal to the degree of the antipodal map x , −x .
3. Verify that the formula f (z1, ··· , z2k) = (z2, −z1, z4, −z3, ··· , z2k, −z2k−1) deﬁnes
a map f : C2k→C2k inducing a quotient map CP2k−1→CP2k−1 without ﬁxed points.
4. If X is a ﬁnite simplicial complex and f : X→X is a simplicial homeomorphism,
show that the Lefschetz number τ(f ) equals the Euler characteristic of the set of ﬁxed
points of f . In particular, τ(f ) is the number of ﬁxed points if the ﬁxed points are
isolated. [Hint: Barycentrically subdivide X to make the ﬁxed point set a subcomplex.]
5. Let M be a closed orientable surface embedded in R3 in such a way that reﬂection
across a plane P deﬁnes a homeomorphism r : M→M ﬁxing M ∩P , a collection of
circles. Is it possible to homotope r to have no ﬁxed points?
6. Do an even-genus analog of Example 2C.4 by replacing the central torus by a sphere
letting f be a homeomorphism that restricts to the antipodal map on this sphere.
7. Verify that the Lefschetz ﬁxed point theorem holds also when τ(f ) is deﬁned using
homology with coefﬁcients in a ﬁeld F .
8. Let X be homotopy equivalent to a ﬁnite simplicial complex and let Y be homotopy
equivalent to a ﬁnite or countably inﬁnite simplicial complex. Using the simplicial ap-
proximation theorem, show that there are at most countably many homotopy classes
of maps X→Y .
9. Show that there are only countably many homotopy types of ﬁnite CW complexes.

Cohomology is an algebraic variant of homology, the result of a simple dualiza-
tion in the deﬁnition. Not surprisingly, the cohomology groups Hi(X) satisfy axioms
much like the axioms for homology, except that induced homomorphisms go in the
opposite direction as a result of the dualization. The basic distinction between homol-
ogy and cohomology is thus that cohomology groups are contravariant functors while
homology groups are covariant. In terms of intrinsic information, however, there is
not a big difference between homology groups and cohomology groups. The homol-
ogy groups of a space determine its cohomology groups, and the converse holds at
least when the homology groups are ﬁnitely generated.
What is a little surprising is that contravariance leads to extra structure in co-
homology. This ﬁrst appears in a natural product, called cup product, which makes
the cohomology groups of a space into a ring. This is an extremely useful piece of
additional structure, and much of this chapter is devoted to studying cup products,
which are considerably more subtle than the additive structure of cohomology.
How does contravariance lead to a product in cohomology that is not present in
homology? Actually there is a natural product in homology, but it takes the somewhat
different form of a map Hi(X)×Hj(Y) -→Hi+j(X×Y) called the cross product. If both
X and Y are CW complexes, this cross product in homology is induced from a map
of cellular chains sending a pair (ei, ej) consisting of a cell of X and a cell of Y to
the product cell ei×ej in X×Y . The details of the construction are described in §3.B.
Taking X = Y , we thus have the ﬁrst half of a hypothetical product
Hi(X)×Hj(X) -→Hi+j(X×X) -→Hi+j(X)
The difﬁculty is in deﬁning the second map. The natural thing would be for this to be
induced by a map X×X→X . The multiplication map in a topological group, or more
generally an H–space, is such a map, and the resulting Pontryagin product can be quite
useful when studying these spaces, as we show in §3.C. But for general X , the only
