[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 3. Cohomology
현재 소단원: 3.intro 개관 (도입부)
직전 소단원: 「2.C.ex Exercises」
[본문]
Cohomology is an algebraic variant of homology, the result of a simple dualiza-
tion in the deﬁnition. Not surprisingly, the cohomology groups Hi(X) satisfy axioms
much like the axioms for homology, except that induced homomorphisms go in the
opposite direction as a result of the dualization. The basic distinction between homol-
ogy and cohomology is thus that cohomology groups are contravariant functors while
homology groups are covariant. In terms of intrinsic information, however, there is
not a big difference between homology groups and cohomology groups. The homol-
ogy groups of a space determine its cohomology groups, and the converse holds at
least when the homology groups are ﬁnitely generated.
What is a little surprising is that contravariance leads to extra structure in co-
homology. This ﬁrst appears in a natural product, called cup product, which makes
the cohomology groups of a space into a ring. This is an extremely useful piece of
additional structure, and much of this chapter is devoted to studying cup products,
which are considerably more subtle than the additive structure of cohomology.
How does contravariance lead to a product in cohomology that is not present in
homology? Actually there is a natural product in homology, but it takes the somewhat
different form of a map Hi(X)×Hj(Y) -→Hi+j(X×Y) called the cross product. If both
X and Y are CW complexes, this cross product in homology is induced from a map
of cellular chains sending a pair (ei, ej) consisting of a cell of X and a cell of Y to
the product cell ei×ej in X×Y . The details of the construction are described in §3.B.
Taking X = Y , we thus have the ﬁrst half of a hypothetical product
Hi(X)×Hj(X) -→Hi+j(X×X) -→Hi+j(X)
The difﬁculty is in deﬁning the second map. The natural thing would be for this to be
induced by a map X×X→X . The multiplication map in a topological group, or more
generally an H–space, is such a map, and the resulting Pontryagin product can be quite
useful when studying these spaces, as we show in §3.C. But for general X , the only

186
Chapter 3
Cohomology
natural maps X×X→X are the projections onto one of the factors, and since these
projections collapse the other factor to a point, the resulting product in homology is
rather trivial.
With cohomology, however, the situation is better. One still has a cross product
Hi(X)×Hj(Y) -→Hi+j(X×Y) constructed in much the same way as in homology, so
one can again take X = Y and get the ﬁrst half of a product
Hi(X)×Hj(X) -→Hi+j(X×X) -→Hi+j(X)
But now by contravariance the second map would be induced by a map X→X×X ,
and there is an obvious candidate for this map, the diagonal map ∆(x) = (x, x). This
turns out to work very nicely, giving a well-behaved product in cohomology, the cup
product.
Another sort of extra structure in cohomology whose existence is traceable to
contravariance is provided by cohomology operations. These make the cohomology
groups of a space into a module over a certain rather complicated ring. Cohomology
operations lie at a depth somewhat greater than the cup product structure, so we
defer their study to §4.L.
The extra layer of algebra in cohomology arising from the dualization in its def-
inition may seem at ﬁrst to be separating it further from topology, but there are
many topological situations where cohomology arises quite naturally. One of these is
Poincar´e duality, the topic of the third section of this chapter. Another is obstruction
theory, covered in §4.3. Characteristic classes in vector bundle theory (see [Milnor &
Stasheff 1974] or [VBKT]) provide a further instance.
From the viewpoint of homotopy theory, cohomology is in some ways more basic
than homology. As we shall see in §4.3, cohomology has a description in terms of
homotopy classes of maps that is very similar to, and in a certain sense dual to, the
deﬁnition of homotopy groups. There is an analog of this for homology, described in
§4.F, but the construction is more complicated.
The Idea of Cohomology
Let us look at a few low-dimensional examples to get an idea of how one might be
led naturally to consider cohomology groups, and to see what properties of a space
they might be measuring. For the sake of simplicity we consider simplicial cohomology
of ∆complexes, rather than singular cohomology of more general spaces.
Taking the simplest case ﬁrst, let X be a 1 dimensional ∆complex, or in other
words an oriented graph. For a ﬁxed abelian group G, the set of all functions from ver-
tices of X to G also forms an abelian group, which we denote by ∆0(X; G). Similarly
the set of all functions assigning an element of G to each edge of X forms an abelian
group ∆1(X; G). We will be interested in the homomorphism δ : ∆0(X; G)→∆1(X; G)
sending ϕ ∈∆0(X; G) to the function δϕ ∈∆1(X; G) whose value on an oriented

The Idea of Cohomology
187
edge [v0, v1] is the difference ϕ(v1) −ϕ(v0). For example, X might be the graph
formed by a system of trails on a mountain, with vertices at the junctions between
trails. The function ϕ could then assign to each junction its elevation above sea level,
in which case δϕ would measure the net change in elevation along the trail from one
junction to the next. Or X might represent a simple electrical circuit with ϕ mea-
suring voltages at the connection points, the vertices, and δϕ measuring changes in
voltage across the components of the circuit, represented by edges.
Regarding the map δ : ∆0(X; G)→∆1(X; G) as a chain complex with 0’s before and
after these two terms, the homology groups of this chain complex are by deﬁnition
the simplicial cohomology groups of X , namely H0(X; G) = Ker δ ⊂∆0(X; G) and
H1(X; G) = ∆1(X; G)/ Im δ. For simplicity we are using here the same notation as will
be used for singular cohomology later in the chapter, in anticipation of the theorem
that the two theories coincide for ∆complexes, as we show in §3.1.
The group H0(X; G) is easy to describe explicitly. A function ϕ ∈∆0(X; G) has
δϕ = 0 iff ϕ takes the same value at both ends of each edge of X . This is equivalent
to saying that ϕ is constant on each component of X . So H0(X; G) is the group of all
functions from the set of components of X to G. This is a direct product of copies
of G, one for each component of X .
The cohomology group H1(X; G) = ∆1(X; G)/ Im δ will be trivial iff the equation
δϕ = ψ has a solution ϕ ∈∆0(X; G) for each ψ ∈∆1(X; G). Solving this equation
means deciding whether specifying the change in ϕ across each edge of X determines
an actual function ϕ ∈∆0(X; G). This is rather like the calculus problem of ﬁnding a
function having a speciﬁed derivative, with the difference operator δ playing the role
of differentiation. As in calculus, if a solution of δϕ = ψ exists, it will be unique up
to adding an element of the kernel of δ, that is, a function that is constant on each
component of X .
The equation δϕ = ψ is always solvable if X is a tree since if we choose arbitrarily
a value for ϕ at a basepoint vertex v0 , then if the change in ϕ across each edge of
X is speciﬁed, this uniquely determines the value of ϕ at every other vertex v by
induction along the unique path from v0 to v in the tree. When X is not a tree, we
ﬁrst choose a maximal tree in each component of X . Then, since every vertex lies
in one of these maximal trees, the values of ψ on the edges of the maximal trees
determine ϕ uniquely up to a constant on each component of X . But in order for
the equation δϕ = ψ to hold, the value of ψ on each edge not in any of the maximal
trees must equal the difference in the already-determined values of ϕ at the two ends
of the edge. This condition need not be satisﬁed since ψ can have arbitrary values on
these edges. Thus we see that the cohomology group H1(X; G) is a direct product of
copies of the group G, one copy for each edge of X not in one of the chosen maximal
trees. This can be compared with the homology group H1(X; G) which consists of a
direct sum of copies of G, one for each edge of X not in one of the maximal trees.

188
Chapter 3
Cohomology
Note that the relation between H1(X; G) and H1(X; G) is the same as the relation
between H0(X; G) and H0(X; G), with H0(X; G) being a direct product of copies of
G and H0(X; G) a direct sum, with one copy for each component of X in either case.
Now let us move up a dimension, taking X to be a 2 dimensional ∆complex.
Deﬁne ∆0(X; G) and ∆1(X; G) as before, as functions from vertices and edges of X
to the abelian group G, and deﬁne ∆2(X; G) to be the functions from 2 simplices of
X to G. A homomorphism δ : ∆1(X; G)→∆2(X; G) is deﬁned by δψ([v0, v1, v2]) =
ψ([v0, v1]) + ψ([v1, v2]) −ψ([v0, v2]), a signed sum of the values of ψ on the three
edges in the boundary of [v0, v1, v2], just as δϕ([v0, v1]) for ϕ ∈∆0(X; G) was a
signed sum of the values of ϕ on the boundary of [v0, v1]. The two homomorphisms
∆0(X; G)
δ--→∆1(X; G)
δ--→∆2(X; G) form a chain complex since for ϕ ∈∆0(X; G) we
have δδϕ =
 ϕ(v1)−ϕ(v0)

+
 ϕ(v2)−ϕ(v1)

−
 ϕ(v2)−ϕ(v0)

= 0. Extending this
chain complex by 0’s on each end, the resulting homology groups are by deﬁnition
the cohomology groups Hi(X; G).
The formula for the map δ : ∆1(X; G)→∆2(X; G) can be looked at from several
different viewpoints.
Perhaps the simplest is the observation that δψ = 0 iff ψ
satisﬁes the additivity property ψ([v0, v2]) = ψ([v0, v1]) + ψ([v1, v2]), where we
think of the edge [v0, v2] as the sum of the edges [v0, v1] and [v1, v2]. Thus δψ
measures the deviation of ψ from being additive.
From another point of view, δψ can be regarded as an obstruction to ﬁnding
ϕ ∈∆0(X; G) with ψ = δϕ, for if ψ = δϕ then δψ = 0 since δδϕ = 0 as we saw
above. We can think of δψ as a local obstruction to solving ψ = δϕ since it depends
only on the values of ψ within individual 2 simplices of X . If this local obstruction
vanishes, then ψ deﬁnes an element of H1(X; G) which is zero iff ψ = δϕ has
an actual solution. This class in H1(X; G) is thus the global obstruction to solving
ψ = δϕ. This situation is similar to the calculus problem of determining whether a
given vector ﬁeld is the gradient vector ﬁeld of some function. The local obstruction
here is the vanishing of the curl of the vector ﬁeld, and the global obstruction is the
vanishing of all line integrals around closed loops in the domain of the vector ﬁeld.
The condition δψ = 0 has an interpretation of a more geometric nature when X
is a surface and the group G is Z or Z2 . Consider ﬁrst the simpler case G = Z2 . The
condition δψ = 0 means that the number of times that ψ takes the value 1 on the
edges of each 2 simplex is even, either 0 or 2. This means we can associate to ψ a
collection Cψ of disjoint curves in X crossing the
1 skeleton transversely, such that the number of
intersections of Cψ with each edge is equal to the
value of ψ on that edge. If ψ = δϕ for some ϕ,
then the curves of Cψ divide X into two regions
X0 and X1 where the subscript indicates the value
of ϕ on all vertices in the region.

The Idea of Cohomology
189
When G = Z we can reﬁne this construction by building Cψ from a number of
arcs in each 2 simplex, each arc having a transverse orientation, the orientation which
agrees or disagrees with the orientation
of each edge according to the sign of the
value of ψ on the edge, as in the ﬁgure
at the right. The resulting collection Cψ
of disjoint curves in X can be thought
of as something like level curves for a
function ϕ with δϕ = ψ, if such a func-
tion exists. The value of ϕ changes by
1 each time a curve of Cψ is crossed.
For example, if X is a disk then we will
v
5
2
3
0
v1
v2
v
1
3
-
2
0
v1
v2
4
4
3
2
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
show that H1(X; Z) = 0, so δψ = 0 im-
plies ψ = δϕ for some ϕ, hence every
transverse curve system Cψ forms the level curves of a function ϕ. On the other
hand, if X is an annulus then this need no longer be true, as
illustrated in the example shown in the ﬁgure at the left, where
the equation ψ = δϕ obviously has no solution even though
δψ = 0. By identifying the inner and outer boundary circles
of this annulus we obtain a similar example on the torus. Even
with G = Z2 the equation ψ −δϕ has no solution since the
curve Cψ does not separate X into two regions X0 and X1 .
1
1
?
?
0
0
The key to relating cohomology groups to homology groups is the observation
that a function from i simplices of X to G is equivalent to a homomorphism from the
simplicial chain group ∆i(X) to G. This is because ∆i(X) is free abelian with basis the
i simplices of X , and a homomorphism with domain a free abelian group is uniquely
determined by its values on basis elements, which can be assigned arbitrarily. Thus we
have an identiﬁcation of ∆i(X; G) with the group Hom(∆i(X), G) of homomorphisms
∆i(X)→G, which is called the dual group of ∆i(X). There is also a simple relationship
of duality between the homomorphism δ : ∆i(X; G)→∆i+1(X; G) and the boundary
homomorphism ∂: ∆i+1(X)→∆i(X). The general formula for δ is
δϕ([v0, ··· , vi+1]) =
X
j
(−1)jϕ([v0, ··· , bvj, ··· , vi+1])
and the latter sum is just ϕ(∂[v0, ··· , vi+1]). Thus we have δϕ = ϕ∂. In other words,
δ sends each ϕ ∈Hom(∆i(X), G) to the composition ∆i+1(X)
∂--→∆i(X)
ϕ--→G, which
in the language of linear algebra means that δ is the dual map of ∂.
Thus we have the algebraic problem of understanding the relationship between
the homology groups of a chain complex and the homology groups of the dual complex
obtained by applying the functor C,Hom(C, G). This is the ﬁrst topic of the chapter.

190
Chapter 3
Cohomology
Homology groups Hn(X) are the result of a two-stage process: First one forms a
chain complex ··· --→Cn
∂--→Cn−1 --→··· of singular, simplicial, or cellular chains,
then one takes the homology groups of this chain complex, Ker ∂/ Im ∂. To obtain
the cohomology groups Hn(X; G) we interpolate an intermediate step, replacing the
chain groups Cn by the dual groups Hom(Cn, G) and the boundary maps ∂by their
dual maps δ, before forming the cohomology groups Ker δ/ Im δ. The plan for this
section is ﬁrst to sort out the algebra of this dualization process and show that the
cohomology groups are determined algebraically by the homology groups, though
in a somewhat subtle way.
Then after this algebraic excursion we will deﬁne the
cohomology groups of spaces and show that these satisfy basic properties very much
like those for homology. The payoff for all this formal work will begin to be apparent
in subsequent sections.
The Universal Coefﬁcient Theorem
Let us begin with a simple example. Consider the chain complex
−−−−−→
0
Z
Z −−−−−→
2
Z −−−−−→
0
Z−−−−→
−−−−→
0
0
=
C3
=
C2
=
C1
=
C0
where Z
2--→Z is the map x , 2x . If we dualize by taking Hom(−, G) with G = Z,
we obtain the cochain complex
0
Z
Z
2
Z
0
Z
−−−−→
−−−−→
−−−−→
−−−−→−−−−→
0
0
=
C3
=
C2
=
C1
=
C0
∗
∗
∗
∗
In the original chain complex the homology groups are Z’s in dimensions 0 and 3,
together with a Z2 in dimension 1. The homology groups of the dual cochain com-
plex, which are called cohomology groups to emphasize the dualization, are again Z’s
in dimensions 0 and 3, but the Z2 in the 1 dimensional homology of the original
complex has shifted up a dimension to become a Z2 in 2 dimensional cohomology.
More generally, consider any chain complex of ﬁnitely generated free abelian
groups. Such a chain complex always splits as the direct sum of elementary com-
plexes of the forms 0→Z→0 and 0→Z
m--→Z→0, according to Exercise 43 in §2.2.
Applying Hom(−, Z) to this direct sum of elementary complexes, we obtain the direct
sum of the corresponding dual complexes 0←Z←0 and 0←Z
m
←--- Z←0. Thus the
cohomology groups are the same as the homology groups except that torsion is shifted
up one dimension. We will see later in this section that the same relation between ho-
mology and cohomology holds whenever the homology groups are ﬁnitely generated,
even when the chain groups are not ﬁnitely generated. It would also be quite easy to
