[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 3. Cohomology
현재 소단원: 3.E Bockstein Homomorphisms (분할 part 2)
직전 소단원: 「3.D The Cohomology of SO(n)」
[본문]
Limits and Ext
Section 3.F
311
It often happens that one has a CW complex X expressed as a union of an in-
creasing sequence of subcomplexes X0 ⊂X1 ⊂X2 ⊂···. For example, Xi could be
the i skeleton of X , or the Xi ’s could be ﬁnite complexes whose union is X . In situa-
tions of this sort, Proposition 3.33 says that Hn(X; G) is the direct limit lim
--→Hn(Xi; G).
Our goal in this section is to show this holds more generally for any homology the-
ory, and to derive the corresponding formula for cohomology theories, which is a bit
more complicated even for ordinary cohomology with Z coefﬁcients. For ordinary
homology and cohomology the results apply somewhat more generally than just to
CW complexes, since if a space X is the union of an increasing sequence of subspaces
Xi with the property that each compact set in X is contained in some Xi , then the
singular complex of X is the union of the singular complexes of the Xi ’s, and so this
gives a reduction to the CW case.
Passing to limits can often result in nonﬁnitely generated homology and cohomol-
ogy groups. At the end of this section we describe some of the rather subtle behavior
of Ext for nonﬁnitely generated groups.
Direct and Inverse Limits
As a special case of the general deﬁnition in §3.3, the direct limit lim
--→Gi of a
sequence of homomorphisms of abelian groups G1
α1
----→G2
α2
----→G3 -→··· is deﬁned
to be the quotient of the direct sum
L
i Gi by the subgroup consisting of elements of
the form (g1, g2 −α1(g1), g3 −α2(g2), ···). It is easy to see from this deﬁnition that
every element of lim
--→Gi is represented by an element gi ∈Gi for some i, and two
such representatives gi ∈Gi and gj ∈Gj deﬁne the same element of lim
--→Gi iff they
have the same image in some Gk under the appropriate composition of αℓ’s. If all
the αi ’s are injective and are viewed as inclusions of subgroups, lim
--→Gi is just
S
i Gi .
Example 3F.1. For a prime p, consider the sequence Z
p--→Z
p--→Z -→··· with all
maps multiplication by p. Then lim
--→Gi can be identiﬁed with the subgroup Z[1/p]
of Q consisting of rational numbers with denominator a power of p. More generally,
we can realize any subgroup of Q as the direct limit of a sequence Z -→Z -→Z -→···
with an appropriate choice of maps. For example, if the nth map is multiplication by
n, then the direct limit is Q itself.
Example 3F.2. The sequence of injections Zp
p--→Zp2
p--→Zp3 -→···, with p prime,
has direct limit a group we denote Zp∞. This is isomorphic to Z[1/p]/Z, the subgroup
of Q/Z represented by fractions with denominator a power of p.
In fact Q/Z is
isomorphic to the direct sum of the subgroups Z[1/p]/Z ≈Zp∞for all primes p. It is
not hard to determine all the subgroups of Q/Z and see that each one can be realized
as a direct limit of ﬁnite cyclic groups with injective maps between them. Conversely,
every such direct limit is isomorphic to a subgroup of Q/Z.
