[л¬ём„ң л§ҘлқҪ]
мұ…: Algebraic Topology / м Җмһҗ: Allen Hatcher
мұ•н„°: 3. Cohomology
нҳ„мһ¬ мҶҢлӢЁмӣҗ: 3.A.ex Exercises
м§Ғм „ мҶҢлӢЁмӣҗ: гҖҢ3.A Universal Coefficients for HomologyгҖҚ
[м—°мҠөл¬ём ң]
Universal Coefп¬Ғcients for Homology
Section 3.A
267
for all primes p, then A = 0. For the short exact sequences 0вҶ’Z
p--вҶ’ZвҶ’ZpвҶ’0 and
0вҶ’ZвҶ’QвҶ’Q/ZвҶ’0, the six-term exact sequences in (6) of the proposition become
0 -вҶ’Tor(A, Zp) -вҶ’A
p--вҶ’A -вҶ’AвҠ—Zp -вҶ’0
0 -вҶ’Tor(A, Q/Z) -вҶ’A -вҶ’AвҠ—Q -вҶ’AвҠ—Q/Z -вҶ’0
If Tor(A, Zp) = 0 for all p, then exactness of the п¬Ғrst sequence implies that A
p--вҶ’A
is injective for all p, so A is torsionfree. Then Tor(A, Q/Z) = 0 by (3) or (4) of the
proposition, so the second sequence implies that AвҶ’AвҠ—Q is injective, hence A = 0
if AвҠ—Q = 0.
вҠ”вҠ“
The algebra by means of which the Tor functor is derived from tensor products
has a very natural generalization in which abelian groups are replaced by modules
over a п¬Ғxed ring R with identity, using the deп¬Ғnition of tensor product of R modules
given in В§3.2. Free resolutions of R modules are deп¬Ғned in the same way as for abelian
groups, using free R modules, which are direct sums of copies of R. Lemmas 3A.1 and
3A.2 carry over to this context without change, and so one has functors TorR
n(A, B).
However, it need not be true that TorR
n(A, B) = 0 for n > 1. The reason this was
true when R = Z was that subgroups of free groups are free, but submodules of free
R modules need not be free in general. If R is a principal ideal domain, submodules
of free R modules are free, so in this case the rest of the algebra, in particular the
universal coefп¬Ғcient theorem, goes through without change. When R is a п¬Ғeld F , every
module is free and TorF
n(A, B) = 0 for n > 0 via the free resolution 0вҶ’AвҶ’AвҶ’0.
Thus Hn(C вҠ—F G) вүҲHn(C)вҠ—F G if F is a п¬Ғeld.
Exercises
1. Use the universal coefп¬Ғcient theorem to show that if HвҲ—(X; Z) is п¬Ғnitely generated,
so the Euler characteristic ПҮ(X) =
P
n(вҲ’1)n rank Hn(X; Z) is deп¬Ғned, then for any
coefп¬Ғcient п¬Ғeld F we have ПҮ(X) =
P
n(вҲ’1)n dim Hn(X; F).
2. Show that Tor(A, Q/Z) is isomorphic to the torsion subgroup of A. Deduce that
A is torsionfree iff Tor(A, B) = 0 for all B .
3. Show that if eHn(X; Q) and eHn(X; Zp) are zero for all n and all primes p, then
eHn(X; Z) = 0 for all n, and hence eHn(X; G) = 0 for all G and n.
4. Show that вҠ—and Tor commute with direct limits: (lim
--вҶ’AОұ)вҠ—B = lim
--вҶ’(AОұ вҠ—B) and
Tor(lim
--вҶ’AОұ, B) = lim
--вҶ’Tor(AОұ, B).
5. From the fact that Tor(A, B) = 0 if A is free, deduce that Tor(A, B) = 0 if A
is torsionfree by applying the previous problem to the directed system of п¬Ғnitely
generated subgroups AОұ of A.
6. Show that Tor(A, B) is always a torsion group, and that Tor(A, B) contains an
element of order n iff both A and B contain elements of order n.

268
Chapter 3
Cohomology
KВЁunneth formulas describe the homology or cohomology of a product space in
terms of the homology or cohomology of the factors. In nice cases these formulas take
the form HвҲ—(XГ—Y; R) вүҲHвҲ—(X; R)вҠ—HвҲ—(Y; R) or HвҲ—(XГ—Y; R) вүҲHвҲ—(X; R)вҠ—HвҲ—(Y; R)
for a coefп¬Ғcient ring R. For the case of cohomology, such a formula was given in
Theorem 3.16, with hypotheses of п¬Ғnite generation and freeness on the cohomology
of one factor. To obtain a completely general formula without these hypotheses it
turns out that homology is more natural than cohomology, and the main aim in this
section is to derive the general KВЁunneth formula for homology. The new feature of
the general case is that an extra Tor term is needed to describe the full homology of
a product.
The Cross Product in Homology
A major component of the KВЁunneth formula is a cross product map
Hi(X; R)Г—Hj(Y; R)
Г—
---------вҶ’Hi+j(XГ—Y; R)
There are two ways to deп¬Ғne this. One is a direct deп¬Ғnition for singular homology,
involving explicit simplicial formulas. More enlightening, however, is the deп¬Ғnition in
terms of cellular homology. This necessitates assuming X and Y are CW complexes,
but this hypothesis can later be removed by the technique of CW approximation in
В§4.1. We shall focus therefore on the cellular deп¬Ғnition, leaving the simplicial deп¬Ғni-
tion to later in this section for those who are curious to see how it goes.
The key ingredient in the deп¬Ғnition of the cellular cross product will be the fact
that the cellular boundary map satisп¬Ғes d(eiГ—ej) = deiГ—ej + (вҲ’1)ieiГ—dej . Implicit
in the right side of this formula is the convention of treating the symbol Г— as a
bilinear operation on cellular chains.
With this convention we can then say more
generally that d(aГ—b) = daГ—b + (вҲ’1)iaГ—db whenever a is a cellular i chain and
b is a cellular j chain. From this formula it is obvious that the cross product of two
cycles is a cycle. Also, the product of a boundary and a cycle is a boundary since
daГ—b = d(aГ—b) if db = 0, and similarly aГ—db = (вҲ’1)id(aГ—b) if da = 0. Hence
there is an induced bilinear map Hi(X; R)Г—Hj(Y; R)вҶ’Hi+j(XГ—Y; R), which is by
deп¬Ғnition the cross product in cellular homology. Since it is bilinear, it could also
be viewed as a homomorphism Hi(X; R)вҠ—RHj(Y; R)вҶ’Hi+j(XГ—Y; R). In either form,
this cross product turns out to be independent of the cell structures on X and Y .
Our task then is to express the boundary maps in the cellular chain complex
CвҲ—(XГ—Y) for XГ—Y in terms of the boundary maps in the cellular chain complexes
CвҲ—(X) and CвҲ—(Y). For simplicity we consider homology with Z coefп¬Ғcients here,
but the same formula for arbitrary coefп¬Ғcients follows immediately from this special
case. With Z coefп¬Ғcients, the cellular chain group Ci(X) is free with basis the i cells
of X , but there is a sign ambiguity for the basis element corresponding to each cell ei ,
