[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 4. Homotopy Theory
현재 소단원: 4.1.3 Cellular Approximation
직전 소단원: 「4.1.2 Whitehead's Theorem」
[본문]
348
Chapter 4
Homotopy Theory
Whitehead’s theorem does not say that two CW complexes X and Y with iso-
morphic homotopy groups are homotopy equivalent, since there is a big difference
between saying that X and Y have isomorphic homotopy groups and saying that
there is a map X→Y inducing isomorphisms on homotopy groups. For example,
consider X = RP2 and Y = S2×RP∞. These both have fundamental group Z2 , and
Proposition 4.1 implies that their higher homotopy groups are isomorphic since their
universal covers S2 and S2×S∞are homotopy equivalent, S∞being contractible.
But RP2 and S2×RP∞are not homotopy equivalent since their homology groups are
vastly different, S2×RP∞having nonvanishing homology in inﬁnitely many dimen-
sions since it retracts onto RP∞. Another pair of CW complexes that are not homotopy
equivalent but have isomorphic homotopy groups is S2 and S3×CP∞, as we shall see
in Example 4.51.
One very special case when the homotopy type of a CW complex is determined by
its homotopy groups is when all the homotopy groups are trivial, for then the inclusion
map of a 0 cell into the complex induces an isomorphism on homotopy groups, so
the complex deformation retracts to the 0 cell.
Somewhat similar in spirit to the compression lemma is the following rather basic
extension lemma:
Lemma 4.7. Given a CW pair (X, A) and a map f : A→Y with Y path-connected,
then f can be extended to a map X→Y if πn−1(Y) = 0 for all n such that X −A
has cells of dimension n.
Proof: Assume inductively that f has been extended over the (n−1) skeleton. Then
an extension over an n cell exists iff the composition of the cell’s attaching map
Sn−1→Xn−1 with f : Xn−1→Y is nullhomotopic.
⊔⊓
Cellular Approximation
When we showed that π1(Sk) = 0 for k > 1 in Proposition 1.14, we ﬁrst showed
that every loop in Sk can be deformed to miss at least one point if k > 1, then we used
the fact that the complement of a point in Sk is contractible to ﬁnish the proof. The
same strategy could be used to show that πn(Sk) = 0 for n < k if we could do the
ﬁrst step of deforming a map Sn→Sk to be nonsurjective. One might at ﬁrst think
this step was unnecessary, that no continuous map Sn→Sk could be surjective when
n < k, but it is not hard to use space-ﬁlling curves from point-set topology to produce
such maps. Some work must then be done to construct homotopies eliminating this
rather strange behavior.
For maps between CW complexes it turns out to be sufﬁcient for this and many
other purposes in homotopy theory to require just that cells map to cells of the same
or lower dimension. Such a map f : X→Y , satisfying f (Xn) ⊂Y n for all n, is called

Homotopy Groups
Section 4.1
349
a cellular map. It is a fundamental fact that arbitrary maps can always be deformed
to be cellular. This is the cellular approximation theorem:
Theorem 4.8. Every map f : X→Y of CW complexes is homotopic to a cellular map.
If f is already cellular on a subcomplex A ⊂X , the homotopy may be taken to be
stationary on A.
Corollary 4.9. πn(Sk) = 0 for n < k.
Proof: If Sn and Sk are given their usual CW structures, with the 0 cells as basepoints,
then every basepoint-preserving map Sn→Sk can be homotoped, ﬁxing the basepoint,
to be cellular, and hence constant if n < k.
⊔⊓
Linear maps cannot increase dimension, so one might to try to show that arbi-
trary maps can be homotoped to maps with some sort of linearity properties. One
of the oldest results of this sort is the simplicial approximation theorem in §2.C.
Cellular approximation can be regarded as an analog for CW complexes of simplicial
approximation for simplicial complexes since simplicial maps are cellular. However,
simplicial maps are much more rigid than cellular maps, which perhaps explains why
subdivision of the domain is required for simplicial approximation but not for cellular
approximation. The core of the proof of cellular approximation will be a weak form of
simplicial approximation that can be proved by a rather elementary direct argument.
Proof of 4.8: Suppose inductively that f : X→Y is already cellular on the skeleton
Xn−1 , and let en be an n cell of X . The closure of en in X is compact, being the
image of a characteristic map for en , so f takes the closure of en to a compact
set in Y . Since a compact set in a CW complex can meet only ﬁnitely many cells by
Proposition A.1 in the Appendix, it follows that f (en) meets only ﬁnitely many cells
of Y . Let ek ⊂Y be a cell of highest dimension meeting f (en). We may assume
k > n, otherwise f is already cellular on en . We will show below that it is possible to
deform f ||Xn−1 ∪en , staying ﬁxed on Xn−1 , so that f (en) misses some point p ∈ek .
Then we can deform f ||Xn−1 ∪en rel Xn−1 so that f (en) misses the whole cell ek
by composing with a deformation retraction of Y k −{p} onto Y k −ek . By ﬁnitely
many iterations of this process we eventually make f (en) miss all cells of dimension
greater than n. Doing this for all n cells, staying ﬁxed on n cells in A where f is
already cellular, we obtain a homotopy of f ||Xn rel Xn−1 ∪An to a cellular map. The
induction step is then completed by appealing to the homotopy extension property
in Proposition 0.16 to extend this homotopy, together with the constant homotopy
on A, to a homotopy deﬁned on all of X . Letting n go to ∞, the resulting possibly
inﬁnite string of homotopies can be realized as a single homotopy by performing the
nth homotopy during the t interval [1 −1/2n, 1 −1/2n+1]. This makes sense since
each point of X lies in some Xn , which is eventually stationary in the inﬁnite chain
of homotopies.

350
Chapter 4
Homotopy Theory
To ﬁll in the missing step in this argument we will use the following technical
statement:
Lemma 4.10. Let f : In→Z be a map, where Z is obtained from a subspace W by
attaching a cell ek . Then f is homotopic rel f −1(W) to a map f1 for which there
is a simplex ∆k ⊂ek with f −1
1 (∆k) a union (possibly empty) of ﬁnitely many convex
polyhedra, on each of which f1 is the restriction of a linear surjection Rn→Rk .
Here a convex polyhedron in In ⊂Rn is any subspace that can be obtained as
the intersection of a ﬁnite number of half-spaces deﬁned by linear inequalities of the
form
P
i aixi ≤b.
Before proving the lemma, let us see how it ﬁnishes the proof of the cellular
approximation theorem. Composing the given map f : Xn−1 ∪en→Y k with a char-
acteristic map In→X for en , we obtain a map f as in the lemma, with Z = Y k and
W = Y k −ek . The homotopy given by the lemma is ﬁxed on ∂In , hence induces a
homotopy ft of f ||Xn−1 ∪en ﬁxed on Xn−1 . If k > n, there are no surjective linear
maps Rn→Rk , so f −1
1 (∆k) must be empty, and we can choose p to be any point
of ∆k .
⊔⊓
Proof of 4.10: Identifying ek with Rk , let B1, B2 ⊂ek be the closed balls of radius 1
and 2 centered at the origin. Since f −1(B2) is closed and therefore compact in In , it
follows that f is uniformly continuous on f −1(B2). Thus there exists ε > 0 such that
|x −y| < ε implies |f (x) −f (y)| < 1/2 for all x, y ∈f −1(B2). Subdivide the interval
I so that the induced subdivision of In into cubes has each cube lying in a ball of
diameter less than ε. Let K1 be the union of all the closed cubes meeting f −1(B1),
and let K2 be the union of all the closed cubes meeting K1 . Then we have inclusions
f −1(B1) ⊂K1 ⊂K2 ⊂f −1(B2), the last one because points of f (K2) have distance
less than 1/2 from f (K1) and points of f (K1) have distance less than 1/2 from B1 .
K
K
1
K1
f
2
B
B
1
2
f
1
_
(
)
(
)
K2
f (
)
B1
f
1
_
(
)
B2
We can view K2 as a CW complex whose i cells are i dimensional open cubes, the
interiors of the i dimensional faces of the k dimensional cubes of K2 for i ≤k. The
barycentric subdivision of this cubical cell structure is a simplicial complex structure
on K2 whose vertices are the center points of the cells. One can build this simplicial
structure inductively over skeleta of the cubical cell structure, the induction step being

Homotopy Groups
Section 4.1
351
to cone off the simplicial structure on the boundary of each cubical cell to the center
point of the cell.
Let g : K2→ek = Rk be the map that equals f on all vertices of simplices of
the subdivision and is linear on each simplex. Deﬁne a homotopy ft : K2→ek by the
formula (1 −tϕ)f + (tϕ)g where ϕ : K2→[0, 1] is a map with ϕ(∂K2) = 0 and
ϕ(K1) = 1. Thus f0 = f and f1 ||K1 = g||K1 . Since ft is the constant homotopy on
∂K2 , we may extend ft to be the constant homotopy of f on the rest of In .
We claim that there is a neighborhood N of 0 in B1 such that f −1
1 (N) ⊂K1 .
This is equivalent to saying that f1 sends the complement of K1 to the complement
of N . Points in the complement of K2 are no problem since f1 = f on such points
and f sends the complement of K2 to the complement of B1 . For points of K2 −K1
consider a simplex σ of the subdivision of K2 . This is mapped by f into a ball Bσ
of radius 1/2. Since Bσ is convex, g also maps σ into Bσ , and therefore so does f1 .
If σ is not contained in K1 , then Bσ meets the exterior of B1 and hence is disjoint
from a neighborhood of 0 in B1 . Since there are only ﬁnitely many σ ’s, there is a
neighborhood N of 0 in B1 disjoint from f1(σ) for all σ not contained in K1 . For
this N we have f −1
1 (N) ⊂K1 .
For a simplex ∆k ⊂N , the preimage f −1
1 (∆k) ⊂K1 is the union of its intersections
with simplices σ of K1 , and each such intersection is a convex polyhedron since it
is the intersection of σ with the convex polyhedron L−1
σ (∆k) where Lσ : Rn→Rk is
the linear map restricting to g on σ .
(Recall that f1 = g on K1 .)
To ﬁnish the
proof it therefore sufﬁces to choose ∆k to be disjoint from the images of all the
nonsurjective Lσ ’s, which is certainly possible since these images consist of ﬁnitely
many hyperplanes of dimension less than k.
⊔⊓
Example 4.11: Cellular Approximation for Pairs. Every map f : (X, A)→(Y, B) of
CW pairs can be deformed through maps (X, A)→(Y, B) to a cellular map.
This
follows from the theorem by ﬁrst deforming the restriction f : A→B to be cellular,
then extending this to a homotopy of f on all of X , then deforming the resulting map
to be cellular staying ﬁxed on A. As a further reﬁnement, the homotopy of f can be
taken to be stationary on any subcomplex of X where f is already cellular.
An easy consequence of this is:
Corollary 4.12. A CW pair (X, A) is n connected if all the cells in X −A have
dimension greater than n. In particular the pair (X, Xn) is n connected, hence the
inclusion Xn > X induces isomorphisms on πi for i < n and a surjection on πn .
Proof: Applying cellular approximation to maps (Di, ∂Di)→(X, A) with i ≤n gives
the ﬁrst statement. The last statement comes from the long exact sequence of the
pair (X, Xn).
⊔⊓

352
Chapter 4
Homotopy Theory
CW Approximation
A map f : X→Y is called a weak homotopy equivalence if it induces isomor-
phisms πn(X, x0)→πn
 Y, f(x0)

for all n ≥0 and all choices of basepoint x0 .
Whitehead’s theorem can be restated as saying that a weak homotopy equivalence
between CW complexes is a homotopy equivalence. It follows easily that this holds
also for spaces homotopy equivalent to CW complexes. In general, however, weak
homotopy equivalence is strictly weaker than homotopy equivalence. For example,
there exist noncontractible spaces whose homotopy groups are all trivial, such as the
‘quasi-circle’ according to an exercise at the end of this section, and for such spaces a
map to a point is a weak homotopy equivalence that is not a homotopy equivalence.
One of the more important results in this subsection is that for every space X
there is a CW complex Z and a weak homotopy equivalence f : Z→X . Such a map
f : Z→X is called a CW approximation to X . A weak homotopy equivalence induces
isomorphisms on all homology and cohomology groups, as we will show, so CW ap-
proximations allow many general statements in algebraic topology to be reduced to
the case of CW complexes, where one can often make cell-by-cell arguments.
The technique for constructing CW approximations can be used to do other things
as well. For a start, one could try for a relative version in which X is assumed to
contain a subspace A which is already a CW complex and Z is constructed to contain
A as a subcomplex, with f : Z→X restricting to the identity map on A. Next, if (X, A)
is n connected, one could try to make (Z, A) n connected in the strong geometric
sense that all cells of Z −A have dimension greater than n. In fact, it turns out to
be possible to do a construction satisfying the latter condition even if (X, A) is not
n connected, but in this case πi(Z) for i < n will be isomorphic to πi(A) rather than
to πi(X).
Here is a deﬁnition that is sufﬁciently general to cover all these situations. Given
a pair (X, A) where the subspace A ⊂X is a nonempty CW complex, an n connected
CW model for (X, A) is an n connected CW pair (Z, A) and a map f : Z→X with
f ||A the identity, such that f∗: πi(Z)→πi(X) is an isomorphism for i > n and an
injection for i = n, for all choices of basepoint. Since (Z, A) is n connected, the map
πi(A)→πi(Z) is an isomorphism for i < n and a surjection for i = n. In the critical
dimension n, the maps A> Z
f--→X induce a composition πn(A)→πn(Z)→πn(X)
factoring the map πn(A)→πn(X) as a surjection followed by an injection, just as any
homomorphism ϕ : G→H can be factored (uniquely) as a surjection ϕ : G→Im ϕ
followed by an injection Im ϕ > H .
One can think of Z as a sort of homotopy-
theoretic hybrid of A and X . As n increases, the hybrid looks more and more like
A, and less and less like X .
This deﬁnition specializes to the earlier notion of a CW approximation by taking
n = 0 and letting A consist of one point in each path-component of X . This forces
f∗: π0(Z)→π0(X) to be surjective as well as injective.
