[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 4. Homotopy Theory
현재 소단원: 4.1.4 CW Approximation (분할 part 2)
직전 소단원: 「4.1.3 Cellular Approximation」
[본문]
Homotopy Groups
Section 4.1
359
S∞, or more generally the inﬁnite suspension S∞X of any CW complex X , the union
of the iterated suspensions SnX .
12. Show that an n connected, n dimensional CW complex is contractible.
13. Use the extension lemma to show that a CW complex retracts onto any contractible
subcomplex.
14. Use cellular approximation to show that the n skeletons of homotopy equivalent
CW complexes without cells of dimension n + 1 are also homotopy equivalent.
15. Show that every map f : Sn→Sn is homotopic to a multiple of the identity map
by the following steps.
(a) Use Lemma 4.10 (or simplicial approximation, Theorem 2C.1) to reduce to the
case that there exists a point q ∈Sn with f −1(q) = {p1, ··· , pk} and f is an
invertible linear map near each pi .
(b) For f as in (a), consider the composition gf where g : Sn→Sn collapses the
complement of a small ball about q to the basepoint.
Use this to reduce (a)
further to the case k = 1.
(c) Finish the argument by showing that an invertible n×n matrix can be joined by
a path of such matrices to either the identity matrix or the matrix of a reﬂection.
(Use Gaussian elimination, for example.)
16. Show that a map f : X→Y between connected CW complexes factors as a com-
position X→Zn→Y where the ﬁrst map induces isomorphisms on πi for i ≤n and
the second map induces isomorphisms on πi for i ≥n + 1.
17. Show that if X and Y are CW complexes with X m connected and Y n connected,
then (X×Y, X ∨Y) is (m + n + 1) connected, as is the smash product X ∧Y .
18. Give an example of a weak homotopy equivalence X→Y for which there does not
exist a weak homotopy equivalence Y→X .
19. Consider the equivalence relation ≃w generated by weak homotopy equivalence:
X ≃w Y if there are spaces X = X1, X2, ··· , Xn = Y with weak homotopy equivalences
Xi→Xi+1 or Xi←Xi+1 for each i. Show that X ≃w Y iff X and Y have a common
CW approximation.
20. Show that [X, Y] is ﬁnite if X is a ﬁnite connected CW complex and πi(Y) is
ﬁnite for i ≤dim X .
21. For this problem it is convenient to use the notations Xn for the nth stage in a
Postnikov tower for X and Xm for an (m−1) connected covering of X , where X is a
connected CW complex. Show that (Xn)m ≃(Xm)n , so the notation
−→
−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
X
X
X
X
n
m
m
n
Xn
m is unambiguous. Thus πi(Xn
m) ≈πi(X) for m ≤i ≤n and all
other homotopy groups of Xn
m are zero.
22. Show that a path-connected space X is homotopy equivalent to a CW complex with
countably many cells iff πn(X) is countable for all n. [Use the results on simplicial
approximations to maps and spaces in §2.C.]

360
Chapter 4
Homotopy Theory
23. If f : X→Y is a map with X and Y homotopy equivalent to CW complexes, show
that the pair (Mf , X) is homotopy equivalent to a CW pair, where Mf is the mapping
cylinder. Deduce that the mapping cone Cf has the homotopy type of a CW complex.
We have not yet computed any nonzero homotopy groups πn(X) with n ≥2.
In Chapter 1 the two main tools we used for computing fundamental groups were
van Kampen’s theorem and covering spaces.
In the present section we will study
the higher-dimensional analogs of these: the excision theorem for homotopy groups,
and ﬁber bundles. Both of these are quite a bit weaker than their fundamental group
analogs, in that they do not directly compute homotopy groups but only give relations
between the homotopy groups of different spaces. Their applicability is thus more
limited, but sufﬁces for a number of interesting calculations, such as πn(Sn) and more
generally the Hurewicz theorem relating the ﬁrst nonzero homotopy and homology
groups of a space. Another noteworthy application is the Freudenthal suspension
theorem, which leads to stable homotopy groups and in fact the whole subject of
stable homotopy theory.
Excision for Homotopy Groups
What makes homotopy groups so much harder to compute than homology groups
is the failure of the excision property. However, there is a certain dimension range,
depending on connectivities, in which excision does hold for homotopy groups:
Theorem 4.23. Let X be a CW complex decomposed as the union of subcomplexes
A and B with nonempty connected intersection C = A ∩B . If (A, C) is m connected
and (B, C) is n connected, m, n ≥0, then the map πi(A, C)→πi(X, B) induced by
inclusion is an isomorphism for i < m + n and a surjection for i = m + n.
This yields the Freudenthal suspension theorem:
Corollary 4.24. The suspension map πi(Sn)→πi+1(Sn+1) is an isomorphism for
i < 2n −1 and a surjection for i = 2n −1.
More generally this holds for the
suspension πi(X)→πi+1(SX) whenever X is an (n −1) connected CW complex.
Proof: Decompose the suspension SX as the union of two cones C+X and C−X
intersecting in a copy of X . The suspension map is the same as the map
πi(X) ≈πi+1(C+X, X) -→πi+1(SX, C−X) ≈πi+1(SX)
