[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 4. Homotopy Theory
현재 소단원: 4.2 Elementary Methods of Calculation
직전 소단원: 「4.1.4 CW Approximation」
[본문]
360
Chapter 4
Homotopy Theory
23. If f : X→Y is a map with X and Y homotopy equivalent to CW complexes, show
that the pair (Mf , X) is homotopy equivalent to a CW pair, where Mf is the mapping
cylinder. Deduce that the mapping cone Cf has the homotopy type of a CW complex.
We have not yet computed any nonzero homotopy groups πn(X) with n ≥2.
In Chapter 1 the two main tools we used for computing fundamental groups were
van Kampen’s theorem and covering spaces.
In the present section we will study
the higher-dimensional analogs of these: the excision theorem for homotopy groups,
and ﬁber bundles. Both of these are quite a bit weaker than their fundamental group
analogs, in that they do not directly compute homotopy groups but only give relations
between the homotopy groups of different spaces. Their applicability is thus more
limited, but sufﬁces for a number of interesting calculations, such as πn(Sn) and more
generally the Hurewicz theorem relating the ﬁrst nonzero homotopy and homology
groups of a space. Another noteworthy application is the Freudenthal suspension
theorem, which leads to stable homotopy groups and in fact the whole subject of
stable homotopy theory.
Excision for Homotopy Groups
What makes homotopy groups so much harder to compute than homology groups
is the failure of the excision property. However, there is a certain dimension range,
depending on connectivities, in which excision does hold for homotopy groups:
Theorem 4.23. Let X be a CW complex decomposed as the union of subcomplexes
A and B with nonempty connected intersection C = A ∩B . If (A, C) is m connected
and (B, C) is n connected, m, n ≥0, then the map πi(A, C)→πi(X, B) induced by
inclusion is an isomorphism for i < m + n and a surjection for i = m + n.
This yields the Freudenthal suspension theorem:
Corollary 4.24. The suspension map πi(Sn)→πi+1(Sn+1) is an isomorphism for
i < 2n −1 and a surjection for i = 2n −1.
More generally this holds for the
suspension πi(X)→πi+1(SX) whenever X is an (n −1) connected CW complex.
Proof: Decompose the suspension SX as the union of two cones C+X and C−X
intersecting in a copy of X . The suspension map is the same as the map
πi(X) ≈πi+1(C+X, X) -→πi+1(SX, C−X) ≈πi+1(SX)
