[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 4. Homotopy Theory
현재 소단원: 4.2.2 The Hurewicz Theorem (분할 part 2)
직전 소단원: 「4.2.1 Excision for Homotopy Groups」
[본문]
374
Chapter 4
Homotopy Theory
Proposition 4.40. Let X be a connected CW complex with H1(X) = 0. Then there is
a simply-connected CW complex X+ and a map X→X+ inducing isomorphisms on
all homology groups.
Proof: Choose loops ϕα : S1→X1 generating π1(X) and use these to attach cells e2
α
to X to form a simply-connected CW complex X′ . The homology exact sequence
0 -→H2(X) -→H2(X′) -→H2(X′, X) -→0 = H1(X)
splits since H2(X′, X) is free with basis the cells e2
α . Thus we have an isomorphism
H2(X′) ≈H2(X)⊕H2(X′, X). Since X′ is simply-connected, the Hurewicz theorem
gives an isomorphism H2(X′) ≈π2(X′), and so we may represent a basis for the free
summand H2(X′, X) by maps ψα : S2→X′ . We may assume these are cellular maps,
and then use them to attach cells e3
α to X′ forming a simply-connected CW complex
X+ , with the inclusion X > X+ an isomorphism on all homology groups.
⊔⊓
In the preceding proposition, the condition H1(X) = 0 means that π1(X) is equal
to its commutator subgroup, that is, π1(X) is a perfect group. Suppose more gen-
erally that X is a connected CW complex and H ⊂π1(X) is a perfect subgroup.
Let p : eX→X be the covering space corresponding to H , so π1( eX) ≈H is per-
fect and H1( eX) = 0. From the previous proposition we get an inclusion eX > eX+ .
Let X+ be obtained from the disjoint union of
eX+ and the mapping cylinder Mp
by identifying the copies of
eX in these two spaces.
Thus
we have the commutative diagram of inclusion maps shown
−→
−→
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
X
M
X
X
X
p
+
+
∼
∼
≃
at the right.
From the van Kampen theorem, the induced
map π1(X)→π1(X+) is surjective with kernel the normal
subgroup generated by H .
Further, since X+/Mp is homeomorphic to
eX+/ eX we
have H∗(X+, Mp) = H∗( eX+, eX) = 0, so the map X→X+ induces an isomorphism
on homology.
This construction X→X+ , killing a perfect subgroup of π1(X) while preserving
homology, is known as the Quillen plus construction. In some of the main applica-
tions X is a K(G, 1) where G has perfect commutator subgroup, so the map X→X+
abelianizes π1 while preserving homology. The space X+ need no longer be a K(π, 1),
and in fact its homotopy groups can be quite interesting. The most striking example is
G = Σ∞, the inﬁnite symmetric group consisting of permutations of 1, 2, ··· ﬁxing all
but ﬁnitely many n’s, with commutator subgroup the inﬁnite alternating group A∞,
which is perfect. In this case a famous theorem of Barratt-Kahn-Priddy and Quillen
says that the homotopy groups πi(K(Σ∞, 1)+) are the stable homotopy groups of
spheres!
There are limits, however, on which subgroups of π1(X) can be killed without
affecting the homology of X . For example, for X = S1 ∨S1 it is impossible to kill the
commutator subgroup of π1(X) while preserving homology. In fact, by Exercise 23

Elementary Methods of Calculation
Section 4.2
375
at the end of this section every space with fundamental group Z×Z must have H2
nontrivial.
Fiber Bundles
A ‘short exact sequence of spaces’ A > X→X/A gives rise to a long exact se-
quence of homology groups, but not to a long exact sequence of homotopy groups due
to the failure of excision. However, there is a different sort of ‘short exact sequence of
spaces’ that does give a long exact sequence of homotopy groups. This sort of short
exact sequence F -→E
p--→B , called a ﬁber bundle, is distinguished from the type
A> X→X/A in that it has more homogeneity: All the subspaces p−1(b) ⊂E , which
are called ﬁbers, are homeomorphic. For example, E could be the product F ×B with
p : E→B the projection. General ﬁber bundles can be thought of as twisted products.
Familiar examples are the M¨obius band, which is a twisted annulus with line segments
as ﬁbers, and the Klein bottle, which is a twisted torus with circles as ﬁbers.
The topological homogeneity of all the ﬁbers of a ﬁber bundle is rather like the
algebraic homogeneity in a short exact sequence of groups 0→K -→G
p--→H→0
where the ‘ﬁbers’ p−1(h) are the cosets of K in G. In a few ﬁber bundles F→E→B
the space E is actually a group, F is a subgroup (though seldom a normal subgroup),
and B is the space of left or right cosets. One of the nicest such examples is the Hopf
bundle S1→S3→S2 where S3 is the group of quaternions of unit norm and S1 is
the subgroup of unit complex numbers. For this bundle, the long exact sequence of
homotopy groups takes the form
··· -→πi(S1) -→πi(S3) -→πi(S2) -→πi−1(S1) -→πi−1(S3) -→···
In particular, the exact sequence gives an isomorphism π2(S2) ≈π1(S1) since the
two adjacent terms π2(S3) and π1(S3) are zero by cellular approximation. Thus we
have a direct homotopy-theoretic proof that π2(S2) ≈Z. Also, since πi(S1) = 0 for
i > 1 by Proposition 4.1, the exact sequence implies that there are isomorphisms
πi(S3) ≈πi(S2) for all i ≥3, so in particular π3(S2) ≈π3(S3), and by Corollary 4.25
the latter group is Z.
After these preliminary remarks, let us begin by deﬁning the property that leads
to a long exact sequence of homotopy groups. A map p : E→B is said to have the
homotopy lifting property with respect to a space X if, given a homotopy gt : X→B
and a map eg0 : X→E lifting g0 , so p eg0 = g0 , then there exists a homotopy egt : X→E
lifting gt . From a formal point of view, this can be regarded as a special case of the
lift extension property for a pair (Z, A), which asserts that every map Z→B has a
lift Z→E extending a given lift deﬁned on the subspace A ⊂Z . The case (Z, A) =
(X×I, X×{0}) is the homotopy lifting property.
A ﬁbration is a map p : E→B having the homotopy lifting property with respect
to all spaces X . For example, a projection B×F→B is a ﬁbration since we can choose
lifts of the form egt(x) = (gt(x), h(x)) where eg0(x) = (g0(x), h(x)).
