[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 4. Homotopy Theory
현재 소단원: 4.2.4 Stable Homotopy Groups (분할 part 2)
직전 소단원: 「4.2.3 Fiber Bundles」
[본문]
392
Chapter 4
Homotopy Theory
(c) If ℓ1 ··· ℓn ≡±ℓ′
1 ··· ℓ′
n mod m, choose d so that k1 ··· kn +dm = ±1 and show
this implies that g induces an isomorphism on all homotopy groups, hence is a
homotopy equivalence. [For πi with i > 1, consider a lift of g to the universal
cover.]
30. Let E be a subspace of R2 obtained by deleting a subspace of {0}×R. For which
such spaces E is the projection E→R, (x, y) , x , a ﬁber bundle?
31. For a ﬁber bundle F→E→B such that the inclusion F>E is homotopic to a con-
stant map, show that the long exact sequence of homotopy groups breaks up into split
short exact sequences giving isomorphisms πn(B) ≈πn(E) ⊕πn−1(F). In particular,
for the Hopf bundles S3→S7→S4 and S7→S15→S8 this yields isomorphisms
πn(S4) ≈πn(S7) ⊕πn−1(S3)
πn(S8) ≈πn(S15) ⊕πn−1(S7)
Thus π7(S4) and π15(S8) contain Z summands.
32. Show that if Sk→Sm→Sn is a ﬁber bundle, then k = n −1 and m = 2n −1.
[Look at the long exact sequence of homotopy groups.]
33. Show that if there were ﬁber bundles Sn−1→S2n−1→Sn for all n, then the groups
πi(Sn) would be ﬁnitely generated free abelian groups computable by induction, and
nonzero for i ≥n ≥2.
34. Let p : S3→S2 be the Hopf bundle and let q : T 3→S3 be the quotient map collaps-
ing the complement of a ball in the 3 dimensional torus T 3 = S1×S1×S1 to a point.
Show that pq : T 3→S2 induces the trivial map on π∗and eH∗, but is not homotopic
to a constant map.
35. Show that the ﬁber bundle S3→S4n+3→HPn gives rise to a quotient ﬁber bundle
S2→CP2n+1→HPn by factoring out the action of S1 on S4n+3 by complex scalar
multiplication.
36. For basepoint-preserving maps f : S1→X and g : Sn→X with n > 1, show that
the Whitehead product [f , g] is ±(g −f g), where f g denotes the action of f on g.
37. Show that all Whitehead products in a path-connected H–space are trivial.
38. Show π3(S1∨S2) is not ﬁnitely generated as a module over Z[π1(S1∨S2)] by con-
sidering Whitehead products in the universal cover, using the results in Example 4.52.
Generalize this to πi+j−1(S1 ∨Si ∨Sj) for i, j > 1.
39. Show that the indeterminacy of a Toda bracket ⟨f , g, h⟩with f ∈πs
i , g ∈πs
j ,
h ∈πs
k is the subgroup f πs
j+k+1 + h πs
i+j+1 of πs
i+j+k+1 .

Connections with Cohomology
Section 4.3
393
The Hurewicz theorem provides a strong link between homotopy groups and ho-
mology, and hence also an indirect relation with cohomology. But there is a more di-
rect connection with cohomology of a quite different sort. We will show that for every
CW complex X there is a natural bijection between Hn(X; G) and the set ⟨X, K(G, n)⟩
of basepoint-preserving homotopy classes of maps from X to a K(G, n). We will also
deﬁne a natural group structure on ⟨X, K(G, n)⟩that makes the bijection a group iso-
morphism. The mere fact that there is any connection at all between cohomology and
homotopy classes of maps is the ﬁrst surprise here, and the second is that Eilenberg–
MacLane spaces are involved, since their deﬁnition is entirely in terms of homotopy
groups, which on the face of it have nothing to do with cohomology.
After proving this basic isomorphism Hn(X; G) ≈⟨X, K(G, n)⟩and describing a
few of its immediate applications, the later parts of this section aim toward a further
study of Postnikov towers, which were introduced brieﬂy in §4.1. These provide a
general theoretical method for realizing an arbitrary CW complex as a sort of twisted
product of Eilenberg–MacLane spaces, up to homotopy equivalence.
The most ge-
ometric interpretation of the phrase ‘twisted product’ is the notion of ﬁber bundle
introduced in the previous section, but here we need the more homotopy-theoretic
notion of a ﬁbration, so before we begin the discussion of Postnikov towers we ﬁrst
take a few pages to present some basic constructions and results about ﬁbrations.
As we shall see, Postnikov towers can be expressed as sequences of ﬁbrations
with ﬁbers Eilenberg–MacLane spaces, so we can again expect close connections with
cohomology. One such connection is provided by k invariants, which describe, at
least in principle, how Postnikov towers for a broad class of spaces are determined
by a sequence of cohomology classes. Another application of these ideas, described
at the end of the section, is a technique for factoring basic extension and lifting prob-
lems in homotopy theory into a sequence of smaller problems whose solutions are
equivalent to the vanishing of certain cohomology classes. This technique goes under
the somewhat grandiose title of Obstruction Theory, though it is really quite a simple
idea when expressed in terms of Postnikov towers.
The Homotopy Construction of Cohomology
The main result of this subsection is the following fundamental relationship be-
tween singular cohomology and Eilenberg–MacLane spaces:
Theorem 4.57. There are natural bijections T : ⟨X, K(G, n)⟩→Hn(X; G) for all CW
complexes X and all n > 0, with G any abelian group. Such a T has the form
T([f ]) = f ∗(α) for a certain distinguished class α ∈Hn(K(G, n); G).
