[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 3. Cohomology
현재 소단원: 3.H.ex Exercises
직전 소단원: 「3.H Local Coefficients」
[연습문제]
336
Chapter 3
Cohomology
a, b ∈Z. This has complex conjugation a + bi , a −bi as a ring isomorphism. If
M is nonorientable and connected we can use the homomorphism ω : π1(M)→{±1}
that deﬁnes the bundle of groups MZ to build a bundle of rings E corresponding to
the action of π1(M) on Z[i] given by γ(a + bi) = a + ω(γ)bi. The homology and
cohomology groups of M with coefﬁcients in E depend only on the additive structure
of Z[i] so they split as the direct sum of their real and imaginary parts, which are
just the homology or cohomology groups with ordinary coefﬁcients Z and twisted
coefﬁcients eZ, respectively. The fundamental class in Hn(M; eZ) constructed in Exam-
ple 3H.3 can be viewed as a pure imaginary fundamental class [M] ∈Hn(M; E). Since
cap product with [M] interchanges real and imaginary parts, we obtain:
Theorem 3H.6. If M is a nonorientable closed connected n manifold then cap prod-
uct with the pure imaginary fundamental class [M] gives isomorphisms Hk(M; Z) ≈
Hn−k(M; eZ) and Hk(M; eZ) ≈Hn−k(M; Z).
⊔⊓
More generally this holds with Z replaced by other rings such as Q or Zp . There
is also a version for noncompact manifolds using cohomology with compact supports.
Exercises
1. Compute H∗(S1; E) and H∗(S1; E) for E→S1 the nontrivial bundle with ﬁber Z.
2.
Compute the homology groups with local coefﬁcients Hn(M; MZ) for a closed
nonorientable surface M .
3. Let B(X; G) be the set of isomorphism classes of bundles of groups E→X with
ﬁber G, and let E0→BAut(G) be the bundle corresponding to the ‘identity’ action
ρ : Aut(G)→Aut(G). Show that the map [X, BAut(G)]→B(X, G), [f ] , f ∗(E0), is
a bijection if X is a CW complex, where [X, Y] denotes the set of homotopy classes
of maps X→Y .
4. Show that if ﬁnite connected CW complexes X and Y are homotopy equivalent,
then their universal covers eX and eY are proper homotopy equivalent.
5. If X is a ﬁnite nonsimply-connected graph, show that Hn(X; Z[π1X]) is zero un-
less n = 1, when it is the direct sum of a countably inﬁnite number of Z’s. [Use
Proposition 3H.5 and compute Hn
c ( eX) as lim
--→Hn( eX, eX −Ti) for a suitable sequence
of ﬁnite subtrees T1 ⊂T2 ⊂··· of eX with
S
i Ti = eX .]
6. Show that homology groups Hℓf
n (X; G) can be deﬁned using locally ﬁnite chains,
which are formal sums
P
σ gσ σ of singular simplices σ : ∆n→X with coefﬁcients
gσ ∈G, such that each x ∈X has a neighborhood meeting the images of only ﬁnitely
many σ ’s with gσ ≠0. Develop this homology theory far enough to show that for
a locally compact CW complex X , Hℓf
n (X; G) can be computed using inﬁnite cellular
chains
P
α gαen
α .

Homotopy theory begins with the homotopy groups πn(X), which are the nat-
ural higher-dimensional analogs of the fundamental group. These higher homotopy
groups have certain formal similarities with homology groups. For example, πn(X)
turns out to be always abelian for n ≥2, and there are relative homotopy groups ﬁt-
ting into a long exact sequence just like the long exact sequence of homology groups.
However, the higher homotopy groups are much harder to compute than either ho-
mology groups or the fundamental group, due to the fact that neither the excision
property for homology nor van Kampen’s theorem for π1 holds for higher homotopy
groups.
In spite of these computational difﬁculties, homotopy groups are of great theo-
retical signiﬁcance. One reason for this is Whitehead’s theorem that a map between
CW complexes which induces isomorphisms on all homotopy groups is a homotopy
equivalence. The stronger statement that two CW complexes with isomorphic homo-
topy groups are homotopy equivalent is usually false, however. One of the rare cases
when a CW complex does have its homotopy type uniquely determined by its homo-
topy groups is when it has just a single nontrivial homotopy group. Such spaces,
known as Eilenberg–MacLane spaces, turn out to play a fundamental role in algebraic
topology for a variety of reasons. Perhaps the most important is their close connec-
tion with cohomology: Cohomology classes in a CW complex correspond bijectively
with homotopy classes of maps from the complex into an Eilenberg–MacLane space.
