[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 4. Homotopy Theory
현재 소단원: 4.1.2 Whitehead's Theorem
직전 소단원: 「4.1.1 Definitions and Basic Constructions」
[본문]
346
Chapter 4
Homotopy Theory
A space X with basepoint x0 is said to be n connected if πi(X, x0) = 0 for
i ≤n.
Thus 0 connected means path-connected and 1 connected means simply-
connected. Since n connected implies 0 connected, the choice of the basepoint x0 is
not signiﬁcant. The condition of being n connected can be expressed without mention
of a basepoint since it is an easy exercise to check that the following three conditions
are equivalent.
(1) Every map Si→X is homotopic to a constant map.
(2) Every map Si→X extends to a map Di+1→X .
(3) πi(X, x0) = 0 for all x0 ∈X .
Thus X is n connected if any one of these three conditions holds for all i ≤n.
Similarly, in the relative case it is not hard to see that the following four conditions
are equivalent, for i > 0:
(1) Every map (Di, ∂Di)→(X, A) is homotopic rel ∂Di to a map Di→A.
(2) Every map (Di, ∂Di)→(X, A) is homotopic through such maps to a map Di→A.
(3) Every map (Di, ∂Di)→(X, A) is homotopic through such maps to a constant map
Di→A.
(4) πi(X, A, x0) = 0 for all x0 ∈A.
When i = 0 we did not deﬁne the relative π0 , and (1)–(3) are each equivalent to saying
that each path-component of X contains points in A since D0 is a point and ∂D0 is
empty. The pair (X, A) is called n connected if (1)–(4) hold for all i ≤n, i > 0, and
(1)–(3) hold for i = 0.
Note that X is n connected iff (X, x0) is n connected for some x0 and hence
for all x0 .
Whitehead’s Theorem
Since CW complexes are built using attaching maps whose domains are spheres,
it is perhaps not too surprising that homotopy groups of CW complexes carry a lot of
information. Whitehead’s theorem makes this explicit:
Theorem 4.5. If a map f : X→Y between connected CW complexes induces isomor-
phisms f∗: πn(X)→πn(Y) for all n, then f is a homotopy equivalence. In case f is
the inclusion of a subcomplex X > Y , the conclusion is stronger: X is a deformation
retract of Y .
The proof will follow rather easily from a more technical result that turns out to
be very useful in quite a number of arguments. For convenient reference we call this
the compression lemma.
Lemma 4.6. Let (X, A) be a CW pair and let (Y, B) be any pair with B ≠∅. For
each n such that X −A has cells of dimension n, assume that πn(Y, B, y0) = 0 for
all y0 ∈B . Then every map f : (X, A)→(Y, B) is homotopic rel A to a map X→B .

Homotopy Groups
Section 4.1
347
When n = 0 the condition that πn(Y, B, y0) = 0 for all y0 ∈B is to be regarded
as saying that (Y, B) is 0 connected.
Proof: Assume inductively that f has already been homotoped to take the skeleton
Xk−1 to B . If Φ is the characteristic map of a cell ek of X −A, the composition
fΦ : (Dk, ∂Dk)→(Y, B) can be homotoped into B rel ∂Dk in view of the hypothesis
that πk(Y, B, y0) = 0 if k > 0, or that (Y, B) is 0 connected if k = 0. This homotopy
of f Φ induces a homotopy of f on the quotient space Xk−1 ∪ek of Xk−1 ⨿Dk , a
homotopy rel Xk−1 . Doing this for all k cells of X −A simultaneously, and taking
the constant homotopy on A, we obtain a homotopy of f ||Xk ∪A to a map into B .
By the homotopy extension property in Proposition 0.16, this homotopy extends to a
homotopy deﬁned on all of X , and the induction step is completed.
Finitely many applications of the induction step ﬁnish the proof if the cells of
X −A are of bounded dimension. In the general case we perform the homotopy of
the induction step during the t interval [1 −1/2k, 1 −1/2k+1]. Any ﬁnite skeleton
Xk is eventually stationary under these homotopies, hence we have a well-deﬁned
homotopy ft , t ∈[0, 1], with f1(X) ⊂B .
⊔⊓
Proof of Whitehead’s Theorem: In the special case that f is the inclusion of a sub-
complex, consider the long exact sequence of homotopy groups for the pair (Y, X).
Since f induces isomorphisms on all homotopy groups, the relative groups πn(Y, X)
are zero. Applying the lemma to the identity map (Y, X)→(Y, X) then yields a de-
formation retraction of Y onto X .
The general case can be proved using mapping cylinders. Recall that the mapping
cylinder Mf of a map f : X→Y is the quotient space of the disjoint union of X×I
and Y under the identiﬁcations (x, 1) ∼f (x). Thus Mf contains both X = X×{0}
and Y as subspaces, and Mf deformation retracts onto Y . The map f becomes the
composition of the inclusion X>Mf with the retraction Mf→Y . Since this retraction
is a homotopy equivalence, it sufﬁces to show that Mf deformation retracts onto X if
f induces isomorphisms on homotopy groups, or equivalently, if the relative groups
πn(Mf , X) are all zero.
If the map f happens to be cellular, taking the n skeleton of X to the n skeleton
of Y for all n, then (Mf , X) is a CW pair and so we are done by the ﬁrst paragraph of
the proof. If f is not cellular, we can either appeal to Theorem 4.8 which says that f
is homotopic to a cellular map, or we can use the following argument. First apply the
preceding lemma to obtain a homotopy rel X of the inclusion (X∪Y, X)>(Mf , X) to
a map into X . Since the pair (Mf , X ∪Y) obviously satisﬁes the homotopy extension
property, this homotopy extends to a homotopy from the identity map of Mf to a map
g : Mf→Mf taking X ∪Y into X . Then apply the lemma again to the composition
(X×I ⨿Y, X×∂I ⨿Y) -→(Mf , X ∪Y)
g--→(Mf , X) to ﬁnish the construction of a
deformation retraction of Mf onto X .
⊔⊓

348
Chapter 4
Homotopy Theory
Whitehead’s theorem does not say that two CW complexes X and Y with iso-
morphic homotopy groups are homotopy equivalent, since there is a big difference
between saying that X and Y have isomorphic homotopy groups and saying that
there is a map X→Y inducing isomorphisms on homotopy groups. For example,
consider X = RP2 and Y = S2×RP∞. These both have fundamental group Z2 , and
Proposition 4.1 implies that their higher homotopy groups are isomorphic since their
universal covers S2 and S2×S∞are homotopy equivalent, S∞being contractible.
But RP2 and S2×RP∞are not homotopy equivalent since their homology groups are
vastly different, S2×RP∞having nonvanishing homology in inﬁnitely many dimen-
sions since it retracts onto RP∞. Another pair of CW complexes that are not homotopy
equivalent but have isomorphic homotopy groups is S2 and S3×CP∞, as we shall see
in Example 4.51.
One very special case when the homotopy type of a CW complex is determined by
its homotopy groups is when all the homotopy groups are trivial, for then the inclusion
map of a 0 cell into the complex induces an isomorphism on homotopy groups, so
the complex deformation retracts to the 0 cell.
Somewhat similar in spirit to the compression lemma is the following rather basic
extension lemma:
Lemma 4.7. Given a CW pair (X, A) and a map f : A→Y with Y path-connected,
then f can be extended to a map X→Y if πn−1(Y) = 0 for all n such that X −A
has cells of dimension n.
Proof: Assume inductively that f has been extended over the (n−1) skeleton. Then
an extension over an n cell exists iff the composition of the cell’s attaching map
Sn−1→Xn−1 with f : Xn−1→Y is nullhomotopic.
⊔⊓
Cellular Approximation
When we showed that π1(Sk) = 0 for k > 1 in Proposition 1.14, we ﬁrst showed
that every loop in Sk can be deformed to miss at least one point if k > 1, then we used
the fact that the complement of a point in Sk is contractible to ﬁnish the proof. The
same strategy could be used to show that πn(Sk) = 0 for n < k if we could do the
ﬁrst step of deforming a map Sn→Sk to be nonsurjective. One might at ﬁrst think
this step was unnecessary, that no continuous map Sn→Sk could be surjective when
n < k, but it is not hard to use space-ﬁlling curves from point-set topology to produce
such maps. Some work must then be done to construct homotopies eliminating this
rather strange behavior.
For maps between CW complexes it turns out to be sufﬁcient for this and many
other purposes in homotopy theory to require just that cells map to cells of the same
or lower dimension. Such a map f : X→Y , satisfying f (Xn) ⊂Y n for all n, is called
