[л¬ём„ң л§ҘлқҪ]
мұ…: Algebraic Topology / м Җмһҗ: Allen Hatcher
мұ•н„°: 4. Homotopy Theory
нҳ„мһ¬ мҶҢлӢЁмӣҗ: 4.I Stable Splittings of Spaces
м§Ғм „ мҶҢлӢЁмӣҗ: гҖҢ4.H Eckmann-Hilton DualityгҖҚ
[ліёл¬ё]
466
Chapter 4
Homotopy Theory
FОІ ||SnГ—{0} to attach en+1
ОІ
, and then FОІ ||SnГ—I gives hn on en+1
ОІ
and FОІ gives an
extension of f over the cone on en+1
ОІ
.
This construction assures that fвҲ—: Hn+1(Xn+1, Xn)вҶ’Hn+1(Y, Xn) is an isomor-
phism, so from the п¬Ғve-lemma applied to the long exact sequences of these pairs we
deduce that fвҲ—: Hi(Xn+1)вҶ’Hi(Y) is an isomorphism for i вүӨn + 1. This п¬Ғnishes the
induction step. We may assume the maps fОұ and FОІ are cellular, so X =
S
n Xn is
a CW complex with subcomplexes Xn . Since f : XвҶ’Y is a homology isomorphism
between simply-connected CW complexes, it is a homotopy equivalence.
вҠ”вҠ“
As an example, suppose that Y is a simply-connected CW complex having all its
homology groups free. Then the Moore spaces used in the construction of X can
be taken to be wedges of spheres, and so Xn is obtained from XnвҲ’1 by attaching an
n cell for each Z summand of Hn(Y). The attaching maps may be taken to be cellular,
making X into a CW complex whose cellular chain complex has trivial boundary maps.
Similarly, п¬Ғnite cyclic summands of Hn(Y) can be realized by wedge summands of
the form SnвҲ’1 вҲӘen in M(Hn(Y), n вҲ’1), contributing an n cell and an (n + 1) cell to
X . This is Proposition 4C.1, but the present result is stronger because it tells us that
a п¬Ғnite cyclic summand of Hn can be realized in one step by attaching the cone on a
Moore space M(Zk, n вҲ’1), rather than in two steps of attaching an n cell and then
an (n + 1) cell.
Exercises
1. Show that if A>X is a coп¬Ғbration of compact Hausdorff spaces, then for any space
Y , the map Y XвҶ’Y A obtained by restriction of functions is a п¬Ғbration. [If A > X is
a coп¬Ғbration, so is AГ—Y > XГ—Y for any space Y .]
2.
Consider a pushout diagram as at the right, where B вҠ”f X
вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҶ’
вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҶ’
A
B
X
X
B
f
f
>
>
вҠ”
is B with X attached along A via f . Show that if A > X is a
coп¬Ғbration, so is B > B вҠ”f X .
3. For п¬Ғbrations E1вҶ’B and E2вҶ’B , show that a п¬Ғber-preserving map E1вҶ’E2 that
is a homotopy equivalence is in fact a п¬Ғber homotopy equivalence. [This is dual to
Proposition 0.19.]
4. Deп¬Ғne the dual of an iterated mapping cylinder precisely, in terms of maps from
вҲҶn , and use this to give a deп¬Ғnition of вҲҮX , the dual of вҲҶX , for X a complex of spaces.
It sometimes happens that suspending a space has the effect of simplifying its
homotopy type, as the suspension becomes homotopy equivalent to a wedge sum of

Stable Splittings of Spaces
Section 4.I
467
smaller spaces. Much of the interest in such stable splittings comes from the fact
that they provide a geometric explanation for algebraic splittings of homology and
cohomology groups, as well as other algebraic invariants of spaces that are unaffected
by suspension such as the cohomology operations studied in В§4.L.
The simplest example of a stable splitting occurs for the torus S1Г—S1 . Here the
reduced suspension ОЈ(S1Г—S1) is homotopy equivalent to S2вҲЁS2вҲЁS3 since ОЈ(S1Г—S1)
is S2 вҲЁS2 with a 3 cell attached by the suspension of the attaching map of the 2 cell
of the torus, but the latter attaching map is the commutator of the two inclusions
S1 > S1 , and the suspension of this commutator is trivial since it lies in the abelian
group ПҖ2(S2 вҲЁS2).
By an easy geometric argument we will prove more generally:
Proposition 4I.1. If X and Y are CW complexes, then ОЈ(XГ—Y) вүғОЈXвҲЁОЈY вҲЁОЈ(XвҲ§Y).
For example, ОЈ(SmГ—Sn) вүғSm+1 вҲЁSn+1 вҲЁSm+n+1 . In view of the cup product
structure on HвҲ—(SmГ—Sn) there can be no such splitting of SmГ—Sn before suspension.
Proof: Consider the join X вҲ—Y deп¬Ғned in Chapter 0, consisting of all line segments
joining points in X to points in Y . For our present purposes it is convenient to use
the reduced version of the join, obtained by collapsing to a point the line segment
joining the basepoints x0 вҲҲX and y0 вҲҲY . We will still denote this reduced join
by X вҲ—Y . Consider the space obtained
from X вҲ—Y by attaching reduced cones
CX and CY to the copies of X and Y
at the two ends of X вҲ—Y .
If we col-
CX
CY
X Y
вҲ—
X
Y
lapse each of these cones to a point, we
get the reduced suspension ОЈ(XГ—Y).
Since each cone is contractible, collapsing the cones gives a homotopy equivalence
X вҲ—Y вҲӘCX вҲӘCY вүғОЈ(XГ—Y). Inside X вҲ—Y there are also cones x0 вҲ—Y and X вҲ—y0
intersecting in a point. Collapsing these cones converts X вҲ—Y into ОЈ(X вҲ§Y) and
X вҲ—Y вҲӘCX вҲӘCY into ОЈ(X вҲ§Y) вҲЁОЈX вҲЁОЈY .
вҠ”вҠ“
This result can be applied inductively to obtain splittings for suspensions of prod-
ucts of more than two spaces, using the fact that reduced suspension is smash product
with S1 , and smash product is associative and commutative. For example,
ОЈ(XГ—Y Г—Z) вүғОЈX вҲЁОЈY вҲЁОЈZ вҲЁОЈ(X вҲ§Y) вҲЁОЈ(X вҲ§Z) вҲЁОЈ(Y вҲ§Z) вҲЁОЈ(X вҲ§Y вҲ§Z)
Our next example involves the reduced product J(X) deп¬Ғned in В§3.2. An inter-
esting case is J(Sn), which has a CW structure of the form Sn вҲӘe2n вҲӘe3n вҲӘВ·В·В·. All the
cells ein for i > 1 are attached nontrivially since HвҲ—(J(Sn); Q) is a polynomial ring
Q[x] for n even and a tensor product Q[x]вҠ—ОӣQ[y] for n odd. However, after we
suspend to ОЈJ(Sn), it is a rather surprising fact that all the attaching maps become
trivial:

468
Chapter 4
Homotopy Theory
Proposition 4I.2. ОЈJ(Sn) вүғSn+1 вҲЁS2n+1 вҲЁS3n+1 вҲЁВ·В·В·. More generally, if X is a
connected CW complex then ОЈJ(X) вүғ
W
n ОЈXвҲ§n where XвҲ§n denotes the smash product
of n copies of X .
Proof: The space J(X) is the union of an increasing sequence of subcomplexes Jk(X)
with Jk(X) a quotient of the k fold product X Г—k . The quotient Jk(X)/JkвҲ’1(X) is XвҲ§k .
Thus we have maps
X Г—k -вҶ’Jk(X) -вҶ’XвҲ§k = Jk(X)/JkвҲ’1(X)
By repeated application of the preceding proposition, ОЈXвҲ§k is a wedge summand of
ОЈX Г—k , up to homotopy equivalence. The proof shows moreover that there is a map
ОЈXвҲ§kвҶ’ОЈX Г—k such that the composition ОЈXвҲ§kвҶ’ОЈX Г—kвҶ’ОЈXвҲ§k is homotopic to the
identity. This composition factors as
ОЈXвҲ§k -вҶ’ОЈX Г—k -вҶ’ОЈJk(X) -вҶ’ОЈXвҲ§k
so we obtain a map sk : ОЈXвҲ§kвҶ’ОЈJk(X) such that ОЈXвҲ§k
sk--вҶ’ОЈJk(X)вҶ’ОЈXвҲ§k is homo-
topic to the identity.
The map sk induces a splitting of the long exact sequence of homology groups
for the pair (ОЈJk(X), ОЈJkвҲ’1(X)). Hence the map i вҲЁsk : ОЈJkвҲ’1(X) вҲЁОЈXвҲ§kвҶ’ОЈJk(X)
induces an isomorphism on homology, where i denotes the inclusion map. It follows
by induction that the map
Wn
k=1sk :
Wn
k=1ОЈXвҲ§kвҶ’Jn(X) induces an isomorphism on
homology for all п¬Ғnite n. This implies the corresponding statement for n = вҲһsince
XвҲ§n is (n вҲ’1) connected if X is connected. Thus we have a map
W
k ОЈXвҲ§kвҶ’ОЈJ(X)
inducing an isomorphism on homology. By WhiteheadвҖҷs theorem this map is a homo-
topy equivalence since the spaces are simply-connected CW complexes.
вҠ”вҠ“
For our п¬Ғnal example the stable splitting will be constructed using the group
structure on вҹЁОЈX, Yвҹ©, the set of basepointed homotopy classes of maps ОЈXвҶ’Y .
Proposition 4I.3. For any prime power pn the suspension ОЈK(Zpn, 1) is homotopy
equivalent to a wedge sum X1вҲЁВ·В·В·вҲЁXpвҲ’1 where Xi is a CW complex having eHвҲ—(Xi; Z)
nonzero only in dimensions congruent to 2i mod 2p вҲ’2.
This result is best possible in a strong sense: No matter how many times any one
of the spaces Xi is suspended, it never becomes homotopy equivalent to a nontrivial
wedge sum. This will be shown in Example 4L.3 by studying cohomology operations
in HвҲ—(K(Zpn, 1); Zp). There is also a somewhat simpler KвҖ“theoretic explanation for
this; see [VBKT].
Proof: Let K = K(Zpn, 1). The multiplicative group of nonzero elements in the п¬Ғeld
Zp is cyclic, so let the integer r represent a generator. By Proposition 1B.9 there is a
map f : KвҶ’K inducing multiplication by r on ПҖ1(K). We will need to know that f
induces multiplication by r i on H2iвҲ’1(K; Z) вүҲZpn , and this can be seen as follows. Via

Stable Splittings of Spaces
Section 4.I
469
the natural isomorphism ПҖ1(K) вүҲH1(K; Z) we know that f induces multiplication
by r on H1(K; Z). Via the universal coefп¬Ғcient theorem, f also induces multiplica-
tion by r on H1(K; Zpn) and H2(K; Zpn). The cup product structure in HвҲ—(K; Zpn)
computed in Examples 3.41 and 3E.2 then implies that f induces multiplication by
r i on H2iвҲ’1(K; Zpn), so the same is true for H2iвҲ’1(K; Z) by another application of the
universal coefп¬Ғcient theorem.
For each integer j вүҘ0 let hj : ОЈKвҶ’ОЈK be the difference ОЈf вҲ’r j11, so hj in-
duces multiplication by r i вҲ’r j on H2i(ОЈK; Z) вүҲZpn . By the choice of r we know
that p divides r i вҲ’r j iff i вүЎj mod p вҲ’1. This means that the map induced by hj
on eH2i(ОЈK; Z) has nontrivial kernel iff i вүЎj mod p вҲ’1. Therefore the composition
mi = h1 в—ҰВ·В·В· hiвҲ’1 в—Ұhi+1 В·В·В· hpвҲ’1 induces an isomorphism on
eHвҲ—(ОЈK; Z) in dimen-
sions congruent to 2i mod 2p вҲ’2 and has a nontrivial kernel in other dimensions
where the homology group is nonzero. When there is a nontrivial kernel, some power
of mi will induce the zero map since we are dealing with homomorphisms ZpnвҶ’Zpn .
Let Xi be the mapping telescope of the sequence ОЈKвҶ’ОЈKвҶ’В·В·В· where each map
is mi . Since homology commutes with direct limits, the inclusion of the п¬Ғrst factor
ОЈK>Xi induces an isomorphism on eHвҲ—in dimensions congruent to 2i mod 2p вҲ’2,
and eHвҲ—(Xi; Z) = 0 in all other dimensions. The sum of these inclusions is a map
ОЈKвҶ’X1 вҲЁВ·В·В· вҲЁXpвҲ’1 inducing an isomorphism on all homology groups. Since these
complexes are simply-connected, the result follows by WhiteheadвҖҷs theorem.
вҠ”вҠ“
The construction of the spaces Xi as mapping telescopes produces rather large
spaces, with inп¬Ғnitely many cells in each dimension. However, by Proposition 4C.1
each Xi is homotopy equivalent to a CW complex with the minimum conп¬Ғguration of
cells consistent with its homology, namely, a 0 cell and a k cell for each k congruent
to 2i or 2i + 1 mod 2p вҲ’2.
Stable splittings of K(G, 1)вҖҷs for п¬Ғnite groups G have been much studied and are
a complicated and subtle business. To take the simplest noncyclic example, Proposi-
tion 4I.1 implies that ОЈK(Z2Г—Z2, 1) splits as the wedge sum of two copies of ОЈK(Z2, 1)
and ОЈ
 K(Z2, 1) вҲ§K(Z2, 1)

, but the latter summand can be split further, according to
a result in [Harris & Kuhn 1988] which says that for G the direct sum of k copies
of Zpn , ОЈK(G, 1) splits canonically as the wedge sum of pieces having exactly pk вҲ’1
distinct homotopy types. Some of these summands occur more than once, as we see
in the case of Z2Г—Z2 .
Exercises
1. If a connected CW complex X retracts onto a subcomplex A, show that ОЈX вүғ
ОЈA вҲЁОЈ(X/A). [One approach: Show the map ОЈr + ОЈq : ОЈXвҶ’ОЈA вҲЁОЈ(X/A) induces an
isomorphism on homology, where r : XвҶ’A is the retraction and q : XвҶ’X/A is the
quotient map.]

470
Chapter 4
Homotopy Theory
2. Using the KВЁunneth formula, show that ОЈK(ZmГ—Zn, 1) вүғОЈK(Zm, 1) вҲЁОЈK(Zn, 1)
if m and n are relatively prime. Thus to determine stable splittings of K(Zn, 1) it
sufп¬Ғces to do the case that n is a prime power, as in Proposition 4I.3.
3. Extending Proposition 4I.3, show that the (2k + 1) skeleton of the suspension of a
lens space with fundamental group of order pn is homotopy equivalent to the wedge
sum of the (2k + 1) skeleta of the spaces Xi , if these Xi вҖҷs are chosen to have the
minimum number of cells in each dimension, as described in the remarks following
the proof.
Loopspaces appear at п¬Ғrst glance to be hopelessly complicated objects, but if one
is only interested in homotopy type, there are many cases when great simpliп¬Ғcations
are possible. One of the nicest of these cases is the loopspace of a sphere. We show
in this section that в„ҰSn+1 has the weak homotopy type of the James reduced product
J(Sn) introduced in В§3.2. More generally, we show that в„ҰОЈX has the weak homotopy
type of J(X) for every connected CW complex X . If one wants, one can strengthen
вҖҳweak homotopy typeвҖҷ to вҖҳhomotopy typeвҖҷ by quoting MilnorвҖҷs theorem, mentioned in
В§4.3, that the loopspace of a CW complex has the homotopy type of a CW complex.
Part of the interest in в„ҰОЈX can be attributed to its close connection with the sus-
pension homomorphism ПҖi(X)вҶ’ПҖi+1(ОЈX). We will use the weak homotopy equiva-
lence of в„ҰОЈX with J(X) to give another proof that the suspension homomorphism is
an isomorphism in dimensions up to approximately double the connectivity of X . In
addition, we will obtain an exact sequence that measures the failure of the suspension
map to be an isomorphism in dimensions between double and triple the connectivity
of X . An easy application of this, together with results proved elsewhere in the book,
will be to compute ПҖn+1(Sn) and ПҖn+2(Sn) for all n.
As a rough п¬Ғrst approximation to в„ҰSn+1 there is a natural inclusion of Sn into
в„ҰSn+1 obtained by regarding Sn+1 as the reduced suspension ОЈSn , the quotient
(SnГ—I)/(SnГ—вҲӮIвҲӘ{e}Г—I) where e is the basepoint of Sn , then
associating to each point x вҲҲSn the loop О»(x) in ОЈSn given
by t , (x, t). The п¬Ғgure shows what a few such loops look
e
like. However, we cannot expect this inclusion Sn > в„ҰSn+1
to be a homotopy equivalence since в„ҰSn+1 is an HвҖ“space but
Sn is only an HвҖ“space when n = 1, 3, 7 by the theorem of
Adams discussed in В§4.B. The simplest way to correct this deп¬Ғciency in Sn would be
to replace it by the free HвҖ“space that it generates, the reduced product J(Sn). Re-
