[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 4. Homotopy Theory
현재 소단원: 4.3 Connections with Cohomology
직전 소단원: 「4.2.ex Exercises」
[본문]
Connections with Cohomology
Section 4.3
393
The Hurewicz theorem provides a strong link between homotopy groups and ho-
mology, and hence also an indirect relation with cohomology. But there is a more di-
rect connection with cohomology of a quite different sort. We will show that for every
CW complex X there is a natural bijection between Hn(X; G) and the set ⟨X, K(G, n)⟩
of basepoint-preserving homotopy classes of maps from X to a K(G, n). We will also
deﬁne a natural group structure on ⟨X, K(G, n)⟩that makes the bijection a group iso-
morphism. The mere fact that there is any connection at all between cohomology and
homotopy classes of maps is the ﬁrst surprise here, and the second is that Eilenberg–
MacLane spaces are involved, since their deﬁnition is entirely in terms of homotopy
groups, which on the face of it have nothing to do with cohomology.
After proving this basic isomorphism Hn(X; G) ≈⟨X, K(G, n)⟩and describing a
few of its immediate applications, the later parts of this section aim toward a further
study of Postnikov towers, which were introduced brieﬂy in §4.1. These provide a
general theoretical method for realizing an arbitrary CW complex as a sort of twisted
product of Eilenberg–MacLane spaces, up to homotopy equivalence.
The most ge-
ometric interpretation of the phrase ‘twisted product’ is the notion of ﬁber bundle
introduced in the previous section, but here we need the more homotopy-theoretic
notion of a ﬁbration, so before we begin the discussion of Postnikov towers we ﬁrst
take a few pages to present some basic constructions and results about ﬁbrations.
As we shall see, Postnikov towers can be expressed as sequences of ﬁbrations
with ﬁbers Eilenberg–MacLane spaces, so we can again expect close connections with
cohomology. One such connection is provided by k invariants, which describe, at
least in principle, how Postnikov towers for a broad class of spaces are determined
by a sequence of cohomology classes. Another application of these ideas, described
at the end of the section, is a technique for factoring basic extension and lifting prob-
lems in homotopy theory into a sequence of smaller problems whose solutions are
equivalent to the vanishing of certain cohomology classes. This technique goes under
the somewhat grandiose title of Obstruction Theory, though it is really quite a simple
idea when expressed in terms of Postnikov towers.
The Homotopy Construction of Cohomology
The main result of this subsection is the following fundamental relationship be-
tween singular cohomology and Eilenberg–MacLane spaces:
Theorem 4.57. There are natural bijections T : ⟨X, K(G, n)⟩→Hn(X; G) for all CW
complexes X and all n > 0, with G any abelian group. Such a T has the form
T([f ]) = f ∗(α) for a certain distinguished class α ∈Hn(K(G, n); G).
