[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 4. Homotopy Theory
현재 소단원: 4.3.1 The Homotopy Construction of Cohomology (분할 part 2)
직전 소단원: 「4.3 Connections with Cohomology」
[본문]
Connections with Cohomology
Section 4.3
401
q1c and q2c are homotopic to the identity. The composition (f ∨g)∗(i1∗⊕i2∗) sends
(x, 0) to f∗(x) and (0, y) to g∗(y) since (f ∨g)i1 = f and (f ∨g)i2 = g. Hence
(x, y) is sent to f∗(x) + g∗(y). Combining these facts, we see that the composition
across the top of the diagram is x , f∗(x) + g∗(x). But this composition is also
(f + g)∗since f + g = (f ∨g)c . This ﬁnishes the proof in the covariant case.
The contravariant case is similar, using the corresponding diagram with arrows
reversed. The inverse of i∗
1 ⊕i∗
2 is q∗
1 ⊕q∗
2 by the same reasoning. An element u in
the right-hand group h(K) maps to the element (f ∗(u), g∗(u)) in the lower group
h(ΣX)⊕h(ΣX) since (f ∨g)i1 = f and (f ∨g)i2 = g. An element (x, 0) in the
lower group in the diagram maps to the element x in the left-hand group since q1c
is homotopic to the identity, and similarly (0, y) maps to y . Hence (x, y) maps to
x + y in the left-hand group. We conclude that u ∈h(K) maps by the composition
across the top of the diagram to f ∗(u) + g∗(u) in h(ΣX). But this composition is
(f + g)∗by deﬁnition.
⊔⊓
Returning to the proof of the theorem, we see that the cellular chain complexes for
h∗(X) and H∗(X; G) are isomorphic, so we obtain isomorphisms hn(X) ≈Hn(X; G)
for all n. To verify that these isomorphisms are natural with respect to maps f : X→Y
we may ﬁrst deform such a map f to be cellular. Then f takes each pair (Xn, Xn−1)
to the pair (Y n, Y n−1), hence f induces a chain map of cellular chain complexes in
the h∗theory, as well as for H∗(−; G). To compute these chain maps we may pass to
the quotient maps Xn/Xn−1→Y n/Y n−1 . These are maps of the form
W
α Sn
α→
W
β Sn
β ,
so the induced maps f∗on hn are determined by their component maps f∗: Sn
α→Sn
β .
This is exactly the same situation as with the cellular boundary maps before, where
we saw that the degree of a map Sn→Sn determines the induced map on hn . We
conclude that the cellular chain map induced by f in the h∗theory agrees exactly
with the cellular chain map for H∗(−; G). This implies that the isomorphism between
the two theories is natural.
The situation for cohomology is quite similar, but there is one point in the ar-
gument where a few more words are needed. For cohomology theories the cellular
cochain groups are the direct product, rather than the direct sum, of copies of the
coefﬁcient group G = h0(point), with one copy per cell. This means that when there
are inﬁnitely many cells in a given dimension, it is not automatically true that the
cellular coboundary maps are uniquely determined by how they map factors of one
direct product to factors of the other direct product. To be precise, consider the cel-
lular coboundary map dn : hn(Xn, Xn−1)→hn+1(Xn+1, Xn). Decomposing the latter
group as a product of copies of G for the (n + 1) cells, we see that dn is determined
by the maps hn(Xn/Xn−1)→hn(Sn
α) associated to the attaching maps ϕα of the cells
en+1
α
. The thing to observe is that since ϕα has compact image, meeting only ﬁnitely
many n cells, this map hn(Xn/Xn−1)→hn(Sn
α) is ﬁnitely supported in the sense that

402
Chapter 4
Homotopy Theory
there is a splitting of the domain into a product of ﬁnitely many factors and a product
of the remaining possibly inﬁnite number of factors, such that the map is zero on the
latter product. Finitely supported maps have the good property that they are deter-
mined by their restrictions to the G factors of hn(Xn/Xn−1). From this we deduce,
using the lemma, that the cellular coboundary maps in the h∗theory agree with those
in ordinary cohomology with G coefﬁcients. This extra argument is also needed to
prove naturality of the isomorphisms hn(X) ≈Hn(X; G).
This completes the proof of Theorem 4.59.
⊔⊓
Proof of Theorem 4.57: The functors hn(X) = ⟨X, K(G, n)⟩deﬁne a reduced co-
homology theory, and the coefﬁcient groups hn(Si) = πi(K(G, n)) are the same as
eHn(Si; G), so Theorem 4.59, translated into reduced cohomology, gives natural iso-
morphisms T : ⟨X, K(G, n)⟩→eHn(X; G) for all CW complexes X .
It remains to see that T([f ]) = f ∗(α) for some α ∈eHn(K(G, n); G), independent
of f . This is purely formal: Take α = T(11) for 11 the identity map of K(G, n), and
then naturality gives T([f ]) = T(f ∗(11)) = f ∗T(11) = f ∗(α), where the ﬁrst f ∗
refers to induced homomorphisms for the functor hn , which means composition
with f .
⊔⊓
The fundamental class α = T(11) can be made more explicit if we choose for
K(G, n) a CW complex K with (n −1) skeleton a point. Denoting ⟨X, K(G, n)⟩by
hn(X), then we have
hn(K) ≈hn(Kn+1) ≈Ker d : hn(Kn)→hn+1(Kn+1, Kn)
The map d is the cellular coboundary in h∗cohomology since we have hn(Kn) =
hn(Kn, Kn−1) because Kn−1 is a point and h∗is a reduced theory. The isomorphism
of hn(K) with Ker d is given by restriction of maps K→K to Kn , so the element
11 ∈hn(K) deﬁning the fundamental class T(11) corresponds, under the isomorphism
hn(K) ≈Ker d, to the inclusion Kn>K viewed as an element of hn(Kn). As a cellular
cocycle this element assigns to each n cell of K the element of the coefﬁcient group
G = πn(K) given by the inclusion of the closure of this cell into K . This means that
the fundamental class α ∈Hn(K; G) is represented by the cellular cocycle assigning
to each n cell the element of πn(K) given by a characteristic map for the cell.
By naturality of T it follows that for a cellular map f : X→K , the corresponding
element of Hn(X; G) is represented by the cellular cocycle sending each n cell of X to
the element of G = πn(K) represented by the composition of f with a characteristic
map for the cell.
The natural isomorphism Hn(X; G) ≈⟨X, K(G, n)⟩leads to a basic principle
which reappears many places in algebraic topology, the idea that the occurrence or
nonoccurrence of a certain phenomenon is governed by what happens in a single spe-
cial case, the universal example. To illustrate, let us prove the following special fact:

Connections with Cohomology
Section 4.3
403
The map H1(X; Z)→H2(X; Z), α , α2 , is identically zero for all spaces X .
By taking a CW approximation to X we are reduced to the case that X is a CW complex.
Then every element of H1(X; Z) has the form f ∗(α) for some f : X→K(Z, 1), with
α a fundamental class in H1(K(Z, 1); Z), further reducing us to verifying the result
for this single α, the ‘universal example.’ And for this universal α it is evident that
α2 = 0 since S1 is a K(Z, 1) and H2(S1; Z) = 0.
Does this fact generalize?
It certainly does not hold if we replace the coefﬁ-
cient ring Z by Z2 since H∗(RP∞; Z2) = Z2[x]. Indeed, the example of RP∞shows
more generally that the fundamental class α ∈Hn(K(Z2, n); Z2) generates a poly-
nomial subalgebra Z2[α] ⊂H∗(K(Z2, n); Z2) for each n ≥1, since there is a map
f : RP∞→K(Z2, n) with f ∗(α) = xn and all the powers of xn are nonzero, hence
also all the powers of α. By the same reasoning, the example of CP∞shows that the
fundamental class α ∈H2n(K(Z, 2n); Z) generates a polynomial subalgebra Z[α] in
H∗(K(Z, 2n); Z). As we shall see in [SSAT], H∗(K(Z, 2n); Z)/torsion is exactly this
polynomial algebra Z[α].
A little more subtle is the question of identifying the subalgebra of H∗(K(Z, n); Z)
generated by the fundamental class α for odd n ≥3. By the commutativity prop-
erty of cup products we know that α2 is either zero or of order two. To see that
α2 is nonzero it sufﬁces to ﬁnd a single space X with an element γ ∈Hn(X; Z)
such that γ2 ≠0. The ﬁrst place to look might be RP∞, but its cohomology with Z
coefﬁcients is concentrated in even dimensions. Instead, consider X = RP∞×RP∞.
This has Z2 cohomology Z2[x, y] and Example 3E.5 shows that its Z cohomology
is the Z2[x2, y2] submodule generated by 1 and x2y + xy2 , except in dimension
zero of course, where 1 generates a Z rather than a Z2 . In particular we can take
z = x2k(x2y + xy2) for any k ≥0, and then all powers zm are nonzero since we are
inside the polynomial ring Z2[x, y]. It follows that the subalgebra of H∗(K(Z, n); Z)
generated by α is Z[α]/(2α2) for odd n ≥3.
These examples lead one to wonder just how complicated the cohomology of
K(G, n)’s is. The general construction of a K(G, n) is not very helpful in answering
this question. Consider the case G = Z for example. Here one would start with Sn and
attach (n + 2) cells to kill πn+1(Sn). Since πn+1(Sn) happens to be cyclic, only one
(n + 2) cell is needed. To continue, one would have to compute generators for πn+2
of the resulting space Sn ∪en+2 , use these to attach (n + 3) cells, then compute the
resulting πn+3 , and so on for each successive dimension. When n = 2 this procedure
happens to work out very neatly, and the resulting K(Z, 2) is CP∞with its usual CW
structure having one cell in each even dimension, according to an exercise at the end
of the section. However, for larger n it quickly becomes impractical to make this
procedure explicit since homotopy groups are so hard to compute. One can get some
idea of the difﬁculties of the next case n = 3 by considering the homology groups of
K(Z, 3). Using techniques in [SSAT], the groups Hi(K(Z, 3); Z) for 0 ≤i ≤12 can be

404
Chapter 4
Homotopy Theory
computed to be
Z, 0, 0, Z, 0, Z2, 0, Z3, Z2, Z2, Z3, Z10, Z2
To get this sequence of homology groups would require quite a few cells, and the
situation only gets worse in higher dimensions, where the homology groups are not
always cyclic.
Indeed, one might guess that computing the homology groups of K(Z, n)’s would
be of the same order of difﬁculty as computing the homotopy groups of spheres, but
by some miracle this is not the case. The calculations are indeed complicated, but
they were completely done by Serre and Cartan in the 1950s, not just for K(Z, n)’s,
but for all K(G, n)’s with G ﬁnitely generated abelian. For example, H∗(K(Z, 3); Z2)
is the polynomial algebra Z2[x3, x5, x9, x17, x33, ···] with generators of dimensions
2i + 1, indicated by the subscripts. And in general, for G ﬁnitely generated abelian,
H∗(K(G, n); Zp) is a polynomial algebra on generators of speciﬁed dimensions if p
is 2, while for p an odd prime one gets the tensor product of a polynomial ring
on generators of speciﬁed even dimensions and an exterior algebra on generators of
speciﬁed odd dimensions. With Z coefﬁcients the description of the cohomology is
not nearly so neat, however. We will study these questions in some detail in [SSAT].
There is a good reason for being interested in the cohomology of K(G, n)’s, aris-
ing from the equivalence Hn(X; G) ≈⟨X, K(G, n)⟩. Taking Z coefﬁcients for simplic-
ity, an element of Hm(K(Z, n); Z) corresponds to a map θ : K(Z, n)→K(Z, m). We
can compose θ with any map f : X→K(Z, n) to get a map θf : X→K(Z, m). Letting
f vary and keeping θ ﬁxed, this gives a function Hn(X; Z)→Hm(X; Z), depending
only on θ. This is the idea of cohomology operations, which we study in more detail
in §4.L.
The equivalence Hn(X; G) ≈⟨X, K(G, n)⟩also leads to a new viewpoint toward
cup products. Taking G to be a ring R and setting Kn = K(R, n), then if we are given
maps f : X→Km and g : Y→Kn , we can deﬁne the cross product of the corresponding
cohomology classes by the composition
X×Y
f ×g
--------→Km×Kn ---→Km ∧Kn
µ-----→Km+n
where the middle map is the quotient map and µ can be deﬁned in the following way.
The space Km ∧Kn is (m + n −1) connected, so by the Hurewicz theorem and the
K¨unneth formula for reduced homology we have isomorphisms πm+n(Km ∧Kn) ≈
Hm+n(Km ∧Kn) ≈Hm(Km)⊗Hn(Kn) ≈R⊗R. By Lemmas 4.7 and 4.31 there is then
a map µ : Km ∧Kn→Km+n inducing the multiplication map R⊗R→R on πm+n . Or
we could use the isomorphism Hm+n(Km ∧Kn; R) ≈Hom(Hm+n(Km ∧Kn), R) and
let µ be the map corresponding to the cohomology class given by the multiplication
homomorphism R⊗R→R.

Connections with Cohomology
Section 4.3
405
The case R = Z is particularly simple. We can take Sm as the (m + 1) skeleton
of Km , and similarly for Kn , so Km ∧Kn has Sm ∧Sn as its (m + n + 1) skeleton
and we can obtain µ by extending the inclusion Sm ∧Sn = Sm+n > Km+n .
It is not hard to prove the basic properties of cup product using this deﬁnition,
and in particular the commutativity property becomes somewhat more transparent
from this viewpoint. For example, when R = Z, commutativity just comes down to
the fact that the map Sm ∧Sn→Sn ∧Sm switching the factors has degree (−1)mn
when regarded as a map of Sm+n .
Fibrations
Recall from §4.2 that a ﬁbration is a map p : E→B having the homotopy lifting
property with respect to all spaces. In a ﬁber bundle all the ﬁbers are homeomorphic
by deﬁnition, but this need not be true for ﬁbrations. An example is the linear projec-
tion of a 2 simplex onto one of its edges, which is a ﬁbration according to an exercise
at the end of the section. The following result gives some evidence that ﬁbrations
should be thought of as a homotopy-theoretic analog of ﬁber bundles:
Proposition 4.61. For a ﬁbration p : E→B , the ﬁbers Fb = p−1(b) over each path
component of B are all homotopy equivalent.
Proof: A path γ : I→B gives rise to a homotopy gt : Fγ(0)→B with gt(Fγ(0)) = γ(t).
The inclusion Fγ(0) > E provides a lift eg0 , so by the homotopy lifting property we
have a homotopy egt : Fγ(0)→E with egt(Fγ(0)) ⊂Fγ(t) for all t . In particular, eg1 gives
a map Lγ : Fγ(0)→Fγ(1) . The association γ , Lγ has the following basic properties:
(a) If γ ≃γ′ rel ∂I , then Lγ ≃Lγ′ . In particular the homotopy class of Lγ is inde-
pendent of the choice of the lifting egt of gt .
(b) For a composition of paths γγ′ , Lγγ′ is homotopic to the composition Lγ′Lγ .
From these statements it follows that Lγ is a homotopy equivalence with homotopy
inverse Lγ , where γ is the inverse path of γ .
Before proving (a), note that a ﬁbration has the homotopy lifting property for
pairs (X×I, X×∂I) since the pairs (I×I, I×{0}∪∂I×I) and (I×I, I×{0}) are homeo-
morphic, hence the same is true after taking products with X .
To prove (a), let γ(s, t) be a homotopy from γ(t) to γ′(t), (s, t) ∈I×I . This
determines a family gst : Fγ(0)→B with gst(Fγ(0)) = γ(s, t). Let eg0,t and eg1,t be lifts
deﬁning Lγ and Lγ′ , and let egs,0 be the inclusion Fγ(0) > E for all s . Using the
homotopy lifting property for the pair (Fγ(0)×I, Fγ(0)×∂I), we can extend these lifts
to lifts egst for (s, t) ∈I×I . Restricting to t = 1 then gives a homotopy Lγ ≃Lγ′ .
Property (b) holds since for lifts egt and eg′
t deﬁning Lγ and Lγ′ we obtain a lift
deﬁning Lγγ′ by taking eg2t for 0 ≤t ≤1/2 and eg′
2t−1Lγ for 1/2 ≤t ≤1.
⊔⊓
One may ask whether ﬁbrations satisfy a homotopy analog of the local triviality
property of ﬁber bundles. Observe ﬁrst that for a ﬁbration p : E→B , the restriction
