[Ù¼©ìä£ ÙğÑÙØ¢]
ì▒à: Algebraic Topology / ìáÇìŞÉ: Allen Hatcher
ì▒òÿä░: 4. Homotopy Theory
ÿİäìŞ¼ ìåîÙï¿ìøÉ: 4.3.2 Fibrations
ìğüìáä ìåîÙï¿ìøÉ: ÒÇî4.3.1 The Homotopy Construction of CohomologyÒÇı
[Ù│©Ù¼©]
Connections with Cohomology
Section 4.3
405
The case R = Z is particularly simple. We can take Sm as the (m + 1) skeleton
of Km , and similarly for Kn , so Km ÔêğKn has Sm ÔêğSn as its (m + n + 1) skeleton
and we can obtain ┬Á by extending the inclusion Sm ÔêğSn = Sm+n > Km+n .
It is not hard to prove the basic properties of cup product using this de´¼ünition,
and in particular the commutativity property becomes somewhat more transparent
from this viewpoint. For example, when R = Z, commutativity just comes down to
the fact that the map Sm ÔêğSnÔåÆSn ÔêğSm switching the factors has degree (ÔêÆ1)mn
when regarded as a map of Sm+n .
Fibrations
Recall from ┬ğ4.2 that a ´¼übration is a map p : EÔåÆB having the homotopy lifting
property with respect to all spaces. In a ´¼über bundle all the ´¼übers are homeomorphic
by de´¼ünition, but this need not be true for ´¼übrations. An example is the linear projec-
tion of a 2 simplex onto one of its edges, which is a ´¼übration according to an exercise
at the end of the section. The following result gives some evidence that ´¼übrations
should be thought of as a homotopy-theoretic analog of ´¼über bundles:
Proposition 4.61. For a ´¼übration p : EÔåÆB , the ´¼übers Fb = pÔêÆ1(b) over each path
component of B are all homotopy equivalent.
Proof: A path ╬│ : IÔåÆB gives rise to a homotopy gt : F╬│(0)ÔåÆB with gt(F╬│(0)) = ╬│(t).
The inclusion F╬│(0) > E provides a lift eg0 , so by the homotopy lifting property we
have a homotopy egt : F╬│(0)ÔåÆE with egt(F╬│(0)) ÔèéF╬│(t) for all t . In particular, eg1 gives
a map L╬│ : F╬│(0)ÔåÆF╬│(1) . The association ╬│ , L╬│ has the following basic properties:
(a) If ╬│ Ôëâ╬│ÔÇ▓ rel ÔêéI , then L╬│ ÔëâL╬│ÔÇ▓ . In particular the homotopy class of L╬│ is inde-
pendent of the choice of the lifting egt of gt .
(b) For a composition of paths ╬│╬│ÔÇ▓ , L╬│╬│ÔÇ▓ is homotopic to the composition L╬│ÔÇ▓L╬│ .
From these statements it follows that L╬│ is a homotopy equivalence with homotopy
inverse L╬│ , where ╬│ is the inverse path of ╬│ .
Before proving (a), note that a ´¼übration has the homotopy lifting property for
pairs (X├ùI, X├ùÔêéI) since the pairs (I├ùI, I├ù{0}Ôê¬ÔêéI├ùI) and (I├ùI, I├ù{0}) are homeo-
morphic, hence the same is true after taking products with X .
To prove (a), let ╬│(s, t) be a homotopy from ╬│(t) to ╬│ÔÇ▓(t), (s, t) ÔêêI├ùI . This
determines a family gst : F╬│(0)ÔåÆB with gst(F╬│(0)) = ╬│(s, t). Let eg0,t and eg1,t be lifts
de´¼üning L╬│ and L╬│ÔÇ▓ , and let egs,0 be the inclusion F╬│(0) > E for all s . Using the
homotopy lifting property for the pair (F╬│(0)├ùI, F╬│(0)├ùÔêéI), we can extend these lifts
to lifts egst for (s, t) ÔêêI├ùI . Restricting to t = 1 then gives a homotopy L╬│ ÔëâL╬│ÔÇ▓ .
Property (b) holds since for lifts egt and egÔÇ▓
t de´¼üning L╬│ and L╬│ÔÇ▓ we obtain a lift
de´¼üning L╬│╬│ÔÇ▓ by taking eg2t for 0 Ôëñt Ôëñ1/2 and egÔÇ▓
2tÔêÆ1L╬│ for 1/2 Ôëñt Ôëñ1.
ÔèöÔèô
One may ask whether ´¼übrations satisfy a homotopy analog of the local triviality
property of ´¼über bundles. Observe ´¼ürst that for a ´¼übration p : EÔåÆB , the restriction

406
Chapter 4
Homotopy Theory
p : pÔêÆ1(A)ÔåÆA is a ´¼übration for any subspace A ÔèéB . So we can ask whether every
point of B has a neighborhood U for which the ´¼übration pÔêÆ1(U)ÔåÆU is equivalent
in some homotopy-theoretic sense to a projection U ├ùFÔåÆU . The natural notion of
equivalence for ´¼übrations is de´¼üned in the following way. Given ´¼übrations p1 : E1ÔåÆB
and p2 : E2ÔåÆB , a map f : E1ÔåÆE2 is called ´¼über-preserving if p1 = p2f , or in other
words, f (pÔêÆ1
1 (b)) ÔèépÔêÆ1
2 (b) for all b ÔêêB . A ´¼über-preserving map f : E1ÔåÆE2 is a
´¼über homotopy equivalence if there is a ´¼über-preserving map g : E2ÔåÆE1 such that
both compositions f g and gf are homotopic to the identity through ´¼über-preserving
maps.
A ´¼über homotopy equivalence can be thought of as a family of homotopy
equivalences between corresponding ´¼übers of E1 and E2 . An interesting fact is that a
´¼über-preserving map that is a homotopy equivalence is a ´¼über homotopy equivalence;
this is an exercise for ┬ğ4.H.
We will show that a ´¼übration p : EÔåÆB is locally ´¼über-homotopically trivial in the
sense described above if B is locally contractible. In order to do this we ´¼ürst digress
to introduce another basic concept.
Given a ´¼übration p : EÔåÆB and a map f : AÔåÆB , there is a pullback or induced
´¼übration f Ôêù(E)ÔåÆA obtained by setting f Ôêù(E) = {(a, e) ÔêêA├ùE ||f (a) = p(e)}, with
the projections of f Ôêù(E) onto A and E giving a commutative
diagram as shown at the right. The homotopy lifting property
ÔêÆÔåÆ
ÔêÆÔåÆ
ÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔåÆ
ÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔåÆ
E
A
B
E
(
)
Ôêù
f
f
p
holds for f Ôêù(E)ÔåÆA since a homotopy gt : XÔåÆA gives the ´¼ürst
coordinate of a lift egt : XÔåÆf Ôêù(E), the second coordinate being
a lifting to E of the composed homotopy f gt .
Proposition 4.62. Given a ´¼übration p : EÔåÆB and a homotopy ft : AÔåÆB , the pull-
back ´¼übrations f Ôêù
0 (E)ÔåÆA and f Ôêù
1 (E)ÔåÆA are ´¼über homotopy equivalent.
Proof: Let F : A├ùIÔåÆB be the homotopy ft . The ´¼übration FÔêù(E)ÔåÆA├ùI contains
f Ôêù
0 (E) and f Ôêù
1 (E) over A├ù{0} and A├ù{1}. So it suf´¼üces to prove the following: For
a ´¼übration p : EÔåÆB├ùI , the restricted ´¼übrations Es = pÔêÆ1(B├ù{s})ÔåÆB are all ´¼über
homotopy equivalent for s Ôêê[0, 1].
To prove this assertion the idea is to imitate the construction of the homotopy
equivalences L╬│ in the proof of Proposition 4.61.
A path ╬│ : [0, 1]ÔåÆI gives rise
to a ´¼über-preserving map L╬│ : E╬│(0)ÔåÆE╬│(1) by lifting the homotopy gt : E╬│(0)ÔåÆB├ùI ,
gt(x) = (p(x), ╬│(t)), starting with the inclusion E╬│(0) > E . As before, one shows
the two basic properties (a) and (b), noting that in (a) the homotopy L╬│ ÔëâL╬│ÔÇ▓ is ´¼über-
preserving since it is obtained by lifting a homotopy ht : E╬│(0)├ù[0, 1]ÔåÆB├ùI of the
form ht(x, u) = (p(x), ÔêÆ). From (a) and (b) it follows that L╬│ is a ´¼über homotopy
equivalence with inverse L╬│ .
ÔèöÔèô
Corollary 4.63. A ´¼übration EÔåÆB over a contractible base B is ´¼über homotopy equiv-
alent to a product ´¼übration B├ùFÔåÆB .

Connections with Cohomology
Section 4.3
407
Proof: The pullback of E by the identity map BÔåÆB is E itself, while the pullback by
a constant map BÔåÆB is a product B├ùF .
ÔèöÔèô
Thus we see that if B is locally contractible then any ´¼übration over B is locally
´¼über homotopy equivalent to a product ´¼übration.
Pathspace Constructions
There is a simple but extremely useful way to turn arbitrary mappings into ´¼ü-
brations. Given a map f : AÔåÆB , let Ef be the space of pairs (a, ╬│) where a ÔêêA
and ╬│ : IÔåÆB is a path in B with ╬│(0) = f (a). We topologize Ef as a subspace of
A├ùBI , where BI is the space of mappings IÔåÆB with the compact-open topology; see
the Appendix for the de´¼ünition and basic properties of this topology, in particular
Proposition A.14 which we will be using shortly.
Proposition 4.64. The map p : EfÔåÆB , p(a, ╬│) = ╬│(1), is a ´¼übration.
Proof: Continuity of p follows from (a) of Proposition A.14 in the Appendix which
says that the evaluation map BI ├ùIÔåÆB , (╬│, s) , ╬│(s), is continuous.
To verify the ´¼übration property, let a homotopy gt : XÔåÆB and a lift eg0 : XÔåÆEf
of g0 be given. Write eg0(x) = (h(x), ╬│x) for h : XÔåÆA and ╬│x : IÔåÆB . De´¼üne a lift
egt : XÔåÆEf by egt(x) = (h(x), ╬│x g[0,t](x)), the second coordinate being the path ╬│x
followed by the path traced out by gs(x) for 0 Ôëñs Ôëñt . This composition of paths is
de´¼üned since g0(x) = p eg0(x) = ╬│x(1). To check that egt is a continuous homotopy
we regard it as a map X├ùIÔåÆEf ÔèéA├ùBI and then apply (b) of Proposition A.14 which
in the current context asserts that continuity of a map X├ùIÔåÆA├ùBI is equivalent to
continuity of the associated map X├ùI├ùIÔåÆA├ùB .
ÔèöÔèô
We can regard A as the subspace of Ef consisting of pairs (a, ╬│) with ╬│ the
constant path at f (a), and Ef deformation retracts onto this subspace by restricting
all the paths ╬│ to shorter and shorter initial segments. The map p : EfÔåÆB restricts
to f on the subspace A, so we have factored an arbitrary map f : AÔåÆB as the com-
position A > EfÔåÆB of a homotopy equivalence and a ´¼übration. We can also think
of this construction as extending f to a ´¼übration EfÔåÆB by enlarging its domain to
a homotopy equivalent space. The ´¼über Ff of EfÔåÆB is called the homotopy ´¼über
of f . It consists of all pairs (a, ╬│) with a ÔêêA and ╬│ a path in B from f (a) to a
basepoint b0 ÔêêB .
If f : AÔåÆB is the inclusion of a subspace, then Ef is the space of paths in B
starting at points of A. In this case a map (Ii+1, ÔêéIi+1, Ji)ÔåÆ(B, A, x0) is the same as
a map (Ii, ÔêéIi)ÔåÆ(Ff , ╬│0) where ╬│0 is the constant path at x0 and Ff is the ´¼über of
Ef over x0 . This means that ¤Çi+1(B, A, x0) can be identi´¼üed with ¤Çi(Ff , ╬│0), hence
the long exact sequences of homotopy groups of the pair (B, A) and of the ´¼übration
EfÔåÆB can be identi´¼üed.

408
Chapter 4
Homotopy Theory
An important special case is when f is the inclusion of the basepoint b0 into B .
Then Ef is the space PB of paths in B starting at b0 , and p : PBÔåÆB sends each path
to its endpoint. The ´¼über pÔêÆ1(b0) is the loopspace ÔäĞB consisting of all loops in B
based at b0 . Since PB is contractible by progressively truncating paths, the long exact
sequence of homotopy groups for the path ´¼übration PBÔåÆB yields another proof that
¤Çn(X, x0) Ôëê¤ÇnÔêÆ1(ÔäĞX, x0) for all n.
As we mentioned in the discussion of loopspaces earlier in this section, it is a
theorem of [Milnor 1959] that the loopspace of a CW complex is homotopy equivalent
to a CW complex. MilnorÔÇÖs theorem is actually quite a bit more general than this,
and implies in particular that the homotopy ´¼über of an arbitrary map between CW
complexes has the homotopy type of a CW complex. One can usually avoid quoting
these results by using CW approximations, though it is reassuring to know they are
available if needed, or if one does not want to bother with CW approximations.
If the ´¼übration construction f , Ef is applied to a map p : EÔåÆB that is already
a ´¼übration, one might expect the resulting ´¼übration EpÔåÆB to be closely related to
the original ´¼übration EÔåÆB . This is indeed the case:
Proposition 4.65. If p : EÔåÆB is a ´¼übration, then the inclusion E > Ep is a ´¼über ho-
motopy equivalence. In particular, the homotopy ´¼übers of p are homotopy equivalent
to the actual ´¼übers.
Proof: We apply the homotopy lifting property to the homotopy gt : EpÔåÆB , gt(e, ╬│) =
╬│(t), with initial lift eg0 : EpÔåÆE , eg0(e, ╬│) = e. The lifting egt : EpÔåÆE is then the ´¼ürst
coordinate of a homotopy ht : EpÔåÆEp whose second coordinate is the restriction of
the paths ╬│ to the interval [t, 1]. Since the endpoints of the paths ╬│ are unchanged,
ht is ´¼über-preserving. We have h0 = 11, h1(Ep) ÔèéE , and ht(E) ÔèéE for all t . If we let
i denote the inclusion E > Ep , then ih1 Ôëâ11 via ht and h1i Ôëâ11 via ht ||E , so i is a
´¼über homotopy equivalence.
ÔèöÔèô
We have seen that loopspaces occur as ´¼übers of ´¼übrations PBÔåÆB with con-
tractible total space PB . Here is something of a converse:
Proposition 4.66. If FÔåÆEÔåÆB is a ´¼übration or ´¼über bundle with E contractible,
then there is a weak homotopy equivalence FÔåÆÔäĞB .
Proof: If we compose a contraction of E with the projection p : EÔåÆB then we have
for each point x ÔêêE a path ╬│x in B from p(x) to a basepoint b0 = p(x0), where
x0 is the point to which E contracts. This yields a map EÔåÆPB , x , ╬│x , whose
composition with the ´¼übration PBÔåÆB is p. By restriction this
ÔêÆ
ÔåÆ
ÔêÆ
ÔåÆ
ÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔåÆ
ÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔåÆ
F
B
PB
E ÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔåÆ
ÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔåÆ
B
B
ÔäĞ
p
==
gives a map FÔåÆÔäĞB where F = pÔêÆ1(b0), and the long exact
sequence of homotopy groups for FÔåÆEÔåÆB maps to the long
exact sequence for ÔäĞBÔåÆPBÔåÆB . Since E and PB are contractible, the ´¼üve-lemma
implies that the map FÔåÆÔäĞB is a weak homotopy equivalence.
ÔèöÔèô

Connections with Cohomology
Section 4.3
409
Examples arising from ´¼über bundles constructed earlier in the chapter are O(n) Ôëâ
ÔäĞGn(RÔêŞ), U(n) ÔëâÔäĞGn(CÔêŞ), and Sp(n) ÔëâÔäĞGn(HÔêŞ). In particular, taking n = 1
in the latter two examples, we have S1 ÔëâÔäĞCPÔêŞand S3 ÔëâÔäĞHPÔêŞ. Note that in all
these examples it is a topological group that is homotopy equivalent to a loopspace.
In [Milnor 1956] this is shown to hold in general: For each topological group G there
is a ´¼über bundle GÔåÆEGÔåÆBG with EG contractible, hence by the proposition there
is a weak equivalence G ÔëâÔäĞBG. There is also a converse statement: The loopspace
of a CW complex is homotopy equivalent to a topological group.
The relationship between X and ÔäĞX has been much studied, particularly the case
that ÔäĞX has the homotopy type of a ´¼ünite CW complex, which is of special interest
because of the examples of the classical Lie groups such as O(n), U(n), and Sp(n).
See [Kane 1988] for an introduction to this subject.
It is interesting to see what happens when the process of forming homotopy
´¼übers is iterated. Given a ´¼übration p : EÔåÆB with ´¼über F = pÔêÆ1(b0), we know that the
inclusion of F into the homotopy ´¼über Fp is a homotopy equivalence. Recall that Fp
consists of pairs (e, ╬│) with e ÔêêE and ╬│ a path in B from p(e) to b0 . The inclusion
F > E extends to a map i : FpÔåÆE , i(e, ╬│) = e, and this map is obviously a ´¼übration.
In fact it is the pullback via p of the path ´¼übration PBÔåÆB . This allows us to iterate,
taking the homotopy ´¼über Fi with its map to Fp , and so on, as in the ´¼ürst row of the
following diagram:
ÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔåÆ
E
F
ÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔåÆ
ÔêÆÔåÆ
ÔêÆÔåÆ
ÔêÆÔåÆ
ÔêÆÔåÆ
ÔêÆÔåÆ
ÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔåÆ
ÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔåÆ
ÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔåÆ
F
ÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔåÆ
F
B
B
ÔäĞ
E
ÔäĞ
p
ÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔåÆ
E
ÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔåÆ
B
p
ÔäĞp
i
j
p
i
ÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔåÆ
ÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔåÆFj
...
...
Ôëâ
Ôëâ
Ôëâ
==
==
The actual ´¼über of i over a point e0 ÔêêpÔêÆ1(b0) consists of pairs (e0, ╬│) with ╬│ a
loop in B at the basepoint b0 , so this ´¼über is just ÔäĞB , and the inclusion ÔäĞB > Fi
is a homotopy equivalence. In the second row of the diagram the map ÔäĞBÔåÆF is
the composition ÔäĞB > FiÔåÆFpÔåÆF where the last map is a homotopy inverse to the
inclusion F > Fp , so the square in the diagram containing these maps commutes up
to homotopy. The homotopy ´¼über Fi consists of pairs (╬│, ╬À) where ╬À is a path in E
ending at e0 and ╬│ is a path in B from p(╬À(0)) to b0 . A homotopy inverse to the
inclusion ÔäĞB > Fi is the retraction FiÔåÆÔäĞB sending (╬│, ╬À) to the loop obtained by
composing the inverse path of p╬À with ╬│ . These constructions can now be iterated
inde´¼ünitely.
Thus we produce a sequence
┬À┬À┬ÀÔåÆÔäĞ2BÔåÆÔäĞFÔåÆÔäĞEÔåÆÔäĞBÔåÆFÔåÆEÔåÆB
where any two consecutive maps form a ´¼übration, up to homotopy equivalence, and
all the maps to the left of ÔäĞB are obtained by applying the functor ÔäĞto the later
maps. The long exact sequence of homotopy groups for any ´¼übration in the sequence
coincides with the long exact sequence for FÔåÆEÔåÆB , as the reader can check.

410
Chapter 4
Homotopy Theory
Postnikov Towers
A Postnikov tower for a path-connected space X is a commutative
diagram as at the right, such that:
ÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔåÆ
ÔêÆÔêÆ
ÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔåÆ
ÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔêÆÔåÆ
ÔêÆÔåÆ
ÔêÆÔåÆ
ÔêÆÔåÆ
X
X1
X2
X3
...
(1) The map XÔåÆXn induces an isomorphism on ¤Çi for i Ôëñn.
(2) ¤Çi(Xn) = 0 for i > n.
As we saw in Example 4.17, every connected CW complex X has a
Postnikov tower, and this is unique up to homotopy equivalence by
Corollary 4.19.
If we convert the map XnÔåÆXnÔêÆ1 into a ´¼übration, its ´¼über Fn is a K(¤ÇnX, n), as
is apparent from a brief inspection of the long exact sequence of homotopy groups
for the ´¼übration:
¤Çi+1(Xn)ÔåÆ¤Çi+1(XnÔêÆ1)ÔåÆ¤Çi(Fn)ÔåÆ¤Çi(Xn)ÔåÆ¤Çi(XnÔêÆ1)
We can replace each map XnÔåÆXnÔêÆ1 by a ´¼übration XÔÇ▓
nÔåÆXÔÇ▓
nÔêÆ1 in succession, starting
with X2ÔåÆX1 and working upward. For the inductive step we con-
ÔêÆÔåÆ
X
-
n 1
Xn
ÔêÆÔåÆ
X
-
n 1
Xn
ÔÇ▓
ÔÇ▓
>
>
vert the composition XnÔåÆXnÔêÆ1 > XÔÇ▓
nÔêÆ1 into a ´¼übration XÔÇ▓
nÔåÆXÔÇ▓
nÔêÆ1
´¼ütting into the commutative diagram at the right. Thus we obtain a
Postnikov tower satisfying also the condition
(3) The map XnÔåÆXnÔêÆ1 is a ´¼übration with ´¼über a K(¤ÇnX, n).
To the extent that ´¼übrations can be regarded as twisted products, up to homotopy
equivalence, the spaces Xn in a Postnikov tower for X can be thought of as twisted
products of Eilenberg-MacLane spaces K(¤Çn(X), n).
For many purposes, a CW complex X can be replaced by one of the stages Xn in
a Postnikov tower for X , for example if one is interested in homotopy or homology
groups in only a ´¼ünite range of dimensions. However, to determine the full homotopy
type of X from its Postnikov tower, some sort of limit process is needed.
Let us
investigate this question is somewhat greater generality.
Given a sequence of maps ┬À┬À┬ÀÔåÆX2ÔåÆX1 , de´¼üne their inverse limit lim
ÔåÉ-- Xn to be
the subspace of the product
Q
nXn consisting of sequences of points xn ÔêêXn with
xn mapping to xnÔêÆ1 under the map XnÔåÆXnÔêÆ1 . The corresponding algebraic notion
is the inverse limit lim
ÔåÉ-- Xn of a sequence of group homomorphisms ┬À┬À┬ÀÔåÆG2ÔåÆG1 ,
which is the subgroup of
Q
nGn consisting of sequences of elements gn ÔêêGn with
gn mapping to gnÔêÆ1 under the homomorphism GnÔåÆGnÔêÆ1 .
Proposition 4.67. For an arbitrary sequence of ´¼übrations ┬À┬À┬ÀÔåÆX2ÔåÆX1 the nat-
ural map ╬╗ : ¤Çi(lim
ÔåÉ-- Xn)ÔåÆlim
ÔåÉ-- ¤Çi(Xn) is surjective, and ╬╗ is injective if the maps
¤Çi+1(Xn)ÔåÆ¤Çi+1(XnÔêÆ1) are surjective for n suf´¼üciently large.
Proof: Represent an element of lim
ÔåÉ-- ¤Çi(Xn) by maps fn : (Si, s0)ÔåÆ(Xn, xn). Since
the projection pn : XnÔåÆXnÔêÆ1 takes [fn] to [fnÔêÆ1], by applying the homotopy lifting
