[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 4. Homotopy Theory
현재 소단원: 4.appendix Appendix
직전 소단원: 「4.L Steenrod Squares and Powers」
[본문]
Topology of Cell Complexes
Here we collect a number of basic topological facts about CW complexes for con-
venient reference. A few related facts about manifolds are also proved.
Let us ﬁrst recall from Chapter 0 that a CW complex is a space X constructed in
the following way:
(1) Start with a discrete set X0 , the 0 cells of X .
(2) Inductively, form the n skeleton Xn from Xn−1 by attaching n cells en
α via maps
ϕα : Sn−1→Xn−1 . This means that Xn is the quotient space of Xn−1`
α Dn
α under
the identiﬁcations x ∼ϕα(x) for x ∈∂Dn
α . The cell en
α is the homeomorphic
image of Dn
α −∂Dn
α under the quotient map.
(3) X =
S
n Xn with the weak topology: A set A ⊂X is open (or closed) iff A ∩Xn is
open (or closed) in Xn for each n.
Note that condition (3) is superﬂuous when X is ﬁnite-dimensional, so that X = Xn
for some n. For if A is open in X = Xn , the deﬁnition of the quotient topology on
Xn implies that A ∩Xn−1 is open in Xn−1 , and then by the same reasoning A ∩Xn−2
is open in Xn−2 , and similarly for all the skeleta Xn−i .
Each cell en
α has its characteristic map Φα , which is by deﬁnition the composi-
tion Dn
α > Xn−1`
α Dn
α→Xn > X . This is continuous since it is a composition of
continuous maps, the inclusion Xn > X being continuous by (3). The restriction of
Φα to the interior of Dn
α is a homeomorphism onto en
α .
An alternative way to describe the topology on X is to say that a set A ⊂X is
open (or closed) iff Φ−1
α (A) is open (or closed) in Dn
α for each characteristic map Φα .
In one direction this follows from continuity of the Φα ’s, and in the other direction,
suppose Φ−1
α (A) is open in Dn
α for each Φα , and suppose by induction on n that
A∩Xn−1 is open in Xn−1 . Then since Φ−1
α (A) is open in Dn
α for all α, A∩Xn is open
in Xn by the deﬁnition of the quotient topology on Xn . Hence by (3), A is open in X .
A consequence of this characterization of the topology on X is that X is a quotient
space of
`
n,α Dn
α .
