[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 4. Homotopy Theory
현재 소단원: 4.F.ex Exercises
직전 소단원: 「4.F Spectra and Homology Theories」
[연습문제]
Spectra and Homology Theories
Section 4.F
455
limit of a product need not equal the product of the direct limits. For ﬁnite wedge sums
there is no difﬁculty, so we do have a cohomology theory for ﬁnite CW complexes. But
for general CW complexes a different deﬁnition is needed. The simplest thing to do
is to associate to each spectrum K an Ωspectrum K′ and let hn(X) = ⟨X, K′
n⟩. We
obtain K′ from K by setting K′
n = lim
--→ΩiKn+i , the mapping telescope of the sequence
Kn→ΩKn+1→Ω2Kn+2→···. The Ωspectrum structure is given by equivalences
K′
n = lim
--→ΩiKn+i ≃lim
--→Ωi+1Kn+i+1
κ-----→Ωlim
--→ΩiKn+i+1 = ΩK′
n+1
The ﬁrst homotopy equivalence comes from deleting the ﬁrst term of the sequence
Kn→ΩKn+1→Ω2Kn+2→···, which has negligible effect on the mapping telescope.
The next map κ is a special case of the natural weak equivalence lim
--→ΩZn→Ωlim
--→Zn
that holds for any sequence Z1→Z2→···. Strictly speaking, we should let K′
n be a
CW approximation to the mapping telescope lim
--→ΩiKn+i in order to obtain a spectrum
consisting of CW complexes, in accordance with our deﬁnition of a spectrum.
In case one starts with a suspension spectrum Kn = ΣnK it is not necessary
to take mapping telescopes since one can just set K′
n =
S
i ΩiΣi+nK =
S
i ΩiΣiKn ,
the union with respect to the natural inclusions ΩiΣiKn ⊂Ωi+1Σi+1Kn . The union
S
i ΩiΣiX is usually abbreviated to Ω∞Σ∞X . Another common notation for this union
is QX . Thus πi(QX) = πs
i (X), so Q is a functor converting stable homotopy groups
into ordinary homotopy groups.
It follows routinely from the deﬁnitions that the homology theory deﬁned by a
spectrum is the same as the homology theory deﬁned by the associated Ωspectrum.
One may ask whether every homology theory is deﬁned by a spectrum, as we showed
for cohomology. The answer is yes if one replaces the wedge axiom by a stronger
direct limit axiom: hi(X) = lim
--→hi(Xα), the direct limit over the ﬁnite subcomplexes
Xα of X . The homology theory deﬁned by a spectrum satisﬁes this axiom, and the
converse is proved in [Adams 1971].
Spectra have become the preferred language for describing many stable phenom-
ena in algebraic topology. The increased ﬂexibility of spectra is not without its price,
however, since a number of concepts that are elementary for spaces become quite a
bit more subtle for spectra, such as the proper deﬁnition of a map between spectra,
or the smash product of two spectra. For the reader who wants to learn more about
this language a good starting point is [Adams 1974].
Exercises
1. Assuming the ﬁrst two axioms for a homology theory on the CW category, show
that the direct limit axiom implies the wedge sum axiom. Show that the converse also
holds for countable CW complexes.
2. For CW complexes X and Y consider the suspension sequence
⟨X, Y⟩
Σ--→⟨ΣX, ΣY⟩
Σ--→⟨Σ2X, Σ2Y⟩--→···

456
Chapter 4
Homotopy Theory
Show that if X is a ﬁnite complex, these maps eventually become isomorphisms. [Use
induction on the number of cells of X and the ﬁve-lemma.]
3. Show that for any sequence Z1→Z2→···, the natural map lim
--→ΩZn→Ωlim
--→Zn is
a weak homotopy equivalence, where the direct limits mean mapping telescopes.
It is a common practice in algebraic topology to glue spaces together to form
more complicated spaces.
In this section we describe two general procedures for
making such constructions. The ﬁrst is fairly straightforward but also rather rigid,
lacking some homotopy invariance properties an algebraic topologist would like to
see. The second type of gluing construction avoids these drawbacks by systematic
use of mapping cylinders. We have already seen many special cases of both types of
constructions, and having a general framework covering all these special cases should
provide some conceptual clarity.
A diagram of spaces consists of an oriented graph Γ with a space Xv for each
vertex v of Γ and a map fe : Xv→Xw for each edge e of Γ from a vertex v to a vertex
w , the words ‘from’ and ‘to’ referring to the given orientation of e. Commutativity of
the diagram is not assumed. Denoting such a diagram of spaces simply by X , we deﬁne
a space
X to be the quotient of the disjoint union of all the spaces Xv associated to
vertices of Γ under the identiﬁcations x ∼fe(x) for all maps fe associated to edges
of Γ . To give a name to this construction, let us call
X the amalgamation of the
diagram X . Here are some examples:
If the diagram of spaces has the simple form X0
f←--- A > X1 then
X is the
space X0 ⊔f X1 obtained from X0 by attaching X1 along A via f .
A sequence of inclusions X1 > X1 > ··· determines a diagram of spaces X for
which
X is
S
i Xi with the weak topology. This holds more generally when the
spaces Xi are indexed by any directed set.
From a cover U = {Xi} of a space X by subspaces Xi we can form a diagram of
spaces XU whose vertices are the nonempty ﬁnite intersections Xi1 ∩··· ∩Xin
with distinct indices ij , and whose edges are the various inclusions obtained by
omitting some of the subspaces in such an intersection, for example the inclusions
Xi ∩Xj > Xi . Then
XU equals X as a set, though possibly with a different
topology. If the cover is an open cover, or if X is a CW complex and the Xi ’s are
subcomplexes, then the topology will be the original topology on X .
An action of a group G on a space X determines a diagram of spaces XG , with X
itself as the only space and with maps the homeomorphisms g : X→X , g ∈G,
given by the action. In this case
XG is the orbit space X/G.
