[л¬ём„ң л§ҘлқҪ]
мұ…: Algebraic Topology / м Җмһҗ: Allen Hatcher
мұ•н„°: 4. Homotopy Theory
нҳ„мһ¬ мҶҢлӢЁмӣҗ: 4.G Gluing Constructions
м§Ғм „ мҶҢлӢЁмӣҗ: гҖҢ4.F.ex ExercisesгҖҚ
[ліёл¬ё]
456
Chapter 4
Homotopy Theory
Show that if X is a п¬Ғnite complex, these maps eventually become isomorphisms. [Use
induction on the number of cells of X and the п¬Ғve-lemma.]
3. Show that for any sequence Z1вҶ’Z2вҶ’В·В·В·, the natural map lim
--вҶ’в„ҰZnвҶ’в„Ұlim
--вҶ’Zn is
a weak homotopy equivalence, where the direct limits mean mapping telescopes.
It is a common practice in algebraic topology to glue spaces together to form
more complicated spaces.
In this section we describe two general procedures for
making such constructions. The п¬Ғrst is fairly straightforward but also rather rigid,
lacking some homotopy invariance properties an algebraic topologist would like to
see. The second type of gluing construction avoids these drawbacks by systematic
use of mapping cylinders. We have already seen many special cases of both types of
constructions, and having a general framework covering all these special cases should
provide some conceptual clarity.
A diagram of spaces consists of an oriented graph О“ with a space Xv for each
vertex v of О“ and a map fe : XvвҶ’Xw for each edge e of О“ from a vertex v to a vertex
w , the words вҖҳfromвҖҷ and вҖҳtoвҖҷ referring to the given orientation of e. Commutativity of
the diagram is not assumed. Denoting such a diagram of spaces simply by X , we deп¬Ғne
a space
X to be the quotient of the disjoint union of all the spaces Xv associated to
vertices of О“ under the identiп¬Ғcations x вҲјfe(x) for all maps fe associated to edges
of О“ . To give a name to this construction, let us call
X the amalgamation of the
diagram X . Here are some examples:
If the diagram of spaces has the simple form X0
fвҶҗ--- A > X1 then
X is the
space X0 вҠ”f X1 obtained from X0 by attaching X1 along A via f .
A sequence of inclusions X1 > X1 > В·В·В· determines a diagram of spaces X for
which
X is
S
i Xi with the weak topology. This holds more generally when the
spaces Xi are indexed by any directed set.
From a cover U = {Xi} of a space X by subspaces Xi we can form a diagram of
spaces XU whose vertices are the nonempty п¬Ғnite intersections Xi1 вҲ©В·В·В· вҲ©Xin
with distinct indices ij , and whose edges are the various inclusions obtained by
omitting some of the subspaces in such an intersection, for example the inclusions
Xi вҲ©Xj > Xi . Then
XU equals X as a set, though possibly with a different
topology. If the cover is an open cover, or if X is a CW complex and the Xi вҖҷs are
subcomplexes, then the topology will be the original topology on X .
An action of a group G on a space X determines a diagram of spaces XG , with X
itself as the only space and with maps the homeomorphisms g : XвҶ’X , g вҲҲG,
given by the action. In this case
XG is the orbit space X/G.

Gluing Constructions
Section 4.G
457
A вҲҶcomplex X can be viewed as a diagram of spaces XвҲҶwhere each simplex
of X gives a vertex space Xv which is a simplex of the same dimension, and the
edge maps are the inclusions of faces into the simplices that contain them. Then
XвҲҶ= X .
It can very easily happen that for a diagram of spaces X the amalgamation
X
is rather useless because so much collapsing has occurred that little of the original
diagram remains. For example, consider a diagram X of the form X0вҶҗX0Г—X1вҶ’X1
whose maps are the projections onto the two factors. In this case
X is simply a point.
To correct for problems like this, and to get a notion with nicer homotopy-theoretic
properties, we introduce the homotopy version of
X , which we shall denote вҲҶX
and call the realization of X . Here we again start with the disjoint union of all the
vertex spaces Xv , but instead of passing to a quotient space of this disjoint union,
we enlarge it by п¬Ғlling in a mapping cylinder Mf for each map f of the diagram,
identifying the two ends of this cylinder with the appropriate Xv вҖҷs. In the case of the
projection diagram X0вҶҗX0Г—X1вҶ’X1 , the union of the two mapping cylinders is the
same as the quotient of X0Г—X1Г—I with X0Г—X1Г—{0} collapsed to X0 and X0Г—X1Г—{1}
collapsed to X1 . Thus вҲҶX is the join X0 вҲ—X1 deп¬Ғned in Chapter 0.
We have seen a number of other special cases of the construction вҲҶX . For a dia-
gram consisting of just one map f : X0вҶ’X1 one gets of course the mapping cylinder
Mf itself. For a diagram X0
fвҶҗ--- X1
g--вҶ’X2 the realization вҲҶX is a double mapping
cylinder. In case X2 is a point this is the mapping cone of f . When the diagram has
just one space and one map from this space to itself, then вҲҶX is the mapping torus.
For a diagram consisting of two maps f , g : X0вҶ’X1 the space вҲҶX was studied in Ex-
ample 2.48. Mapping telescopes are the case of a sequence of maps X0вҶ’X1вҶ’В·В·В·.
In В§1.B we considered general diagrams in which the spaces are K(G, 1)вҖҷs.
There is a natural generalization of вҲҶX in which one starts with a вҲҶcomplex
О“ and a diagram of spaces associated to the 1 skeleton of О“ such that the maps
corresponding to the edges of each n simplex of О“ , n > 1, form a commutative di-
agram. We call this data a complex of spaces. If X is a complex of spaces, then
for each n simplex of О“ we have a sequence of maps X0
f1--вҶ’X1
f2--вҶ’В·В·В·
fn--вҶ’Xn ,
and we deп¬Ғne the iterated mapping cylinder M(f1, В·В·В· , fn) to be the usual map-
ping cylinder for n = 1, and inductively for n > 1, the mapping cylinder of the
composition M(f1, В·В·В· , fnвҲ’1)вҶ’XnвҲ’1
fn--вҶ’Xn where the п¬Ғrst map is the canonical
projection of a mapping cylinder onto its target end. There is a natural projection
M(f1, В·В·В· , fn)вҶ’вҲҶn , and over each face of вҲҶn one has the iterated mapping cylin-
der for the maps associated to the edges in this face. For example when n = 2 one
has the three mapping cylinders M(f1), M(f2), and M(f2f1) over the three edges
of вҲҶ2 . All these iterated mapping cylinders over the various simplices of О“ thus п¬Ғt
together to form a space вҲҶX with a canonical projection вҲҶXвҶ’О“ . We again call вҲҶX
the realization of the complex of spaces X , and we call О“ the base of X or вҲҶX .

458
Chapter 4
Homotopy Theory
Some of our earlier examples of diagrams of spaces can be regarded in a natural
way as complexes of spaces:
For a cover U = {Xi} of a space X the diagram of spaces XU whose vertices are
the п¬Ғnite intersections of Xi вҖҷs and whose edges are inclusions is a complex of
spaces with n simplices the n fold inclusions. The base О“ for this complex of
spaces is the barycentric subdivision of the nerve of the cover. Recall from the
end of В§3.3 that the nerve of a cover is the simplicial complex with n simplices
the nonempty (n + 1) fold intersections of sets in the cover.
The diagram of spaces XG associated to an action of a group G on a space X is a
complex of spaces, with n simplices corresponding to the n fold compositions
X
g1--вҶ’X
g2--вҶ’В·В·В·
gn--вҶ’X . The base вҲҶcomplex О“ is the K(G, 1) called BG in В§1.B.
This was the orbit space of a free action of G on a contractible вҲҶcomplex EG.
Checking through the deп¬Ғnitions, one sees that the space вҲҶXG in this case can
be regarded as the quotient of XГ—EG under the diagonal action of G, g(x, y) =
(g(x), g(y)). This is the space we called the Borel construction in В§3.G, with the
notation X Г—G EG.
By a map f : XвҶ’Y of complexes of spaces over the same base О“ we mean a
collection of maps fv : XvвҶ’Yv for all the vertices of О“ , with commutative squares
over all edges of О“ . There is then an induced map вҲҶf : вҲҶXвҶ’вҲҶY .
Proposition 4G.1. If all the maps fv making up a map of complexes of spaces
f : XвҶ’Y are homotopy equivalences, then so is the map вҲҶf : вҲҶXвҶ’вҲҶY .
Proof: The mapping cylinders M(fv) form a complex of spaces M(f) over the same
base О“ , and the space вҲҶM(f ) is the mapping cylinder M(вҲҶf ).
This deformation
retracts onto вҲҶY , so it will sufп¬Ғce to show that it also deformation retracts onto вҲҶX .
Let Mn(вҲҶf ) be the part of M(вҲҶf ) lying over the n skeleton of О“ . We claim that
Mn(вҲҶf ) вҲӘвҲҶX deformation retracts onto MnвҲ’1(вҲҶf ) вҲӘвҲҶX . It is enough to show this
when О“ = вҲҶn . In this case f is a map from X0вҶ’В·В·В·вҶ’Xn to Y0вҶ’В·В·В·вҶ’Yn . By
Corollary 0.20 it sufп¬Ғces to show that the inclusion MnвҲ’1(вҲҶf ) вҲӘвҲҶX > M(вҲҶf ) is a
homotopy equivalence and the pair (M(вҲҶf ), MnвҲ’1(вҲҶf )вҲӘвҲҶX) satisп¬Ғes the homotopy
extension property. The latter assertion is evident from Example 0.15 since a mapping
cylinder neighborhood is easily constructed for this pair. For the other condition, note
that by induction on the dimension of О“ we may assume that MnвҲ’1(вҲҶf ) deformation
retracts onto the part of вҲҶX over вҲӮвҲҶn . Also, the inclusion вҲҶX > M(вҲҶf ) is a ho-
motopy equivalence since it is equivalent to the map XnвҶ’Yn , which is a homotopy
equivalence by hypothesis. So Corollary 0.20 applies, and the claim that Mn(вҲҶf )вҲӘвҲҶX
deformation retracts onto MnвҲ’1(вҲҶf ) вҲӘвҲҶX is proved.
Letting n vary, the inп¬Ғnite concatenation of these deformation retractions in the
t intervals [1/2n+1, 1/2n] gives a deformation retraction of M(вҲҶf ) onto вҲҶX .
вҠ”вҠ“

Gluing Constructions
Section 4.G
459
There is a canonical map вҲҶXвҶ’
X induced by retracting each mapping cylinder
onto its target end. In some cases this is a homotopy equivalence, for example, for
a diagram X0вҶҗA > X1 where the pair (X1, A) has the homotopy extension prop-
erty. Another example is a sequence of inclusions X0>X1>В·В·В· for which the pairs
(Xn, XnвҲ’1) satisfy the homotopy extension property, by the argument involving map-
ping telescopes in the proof of Lemma 2.34. However, without some conditions on
the maps it need not be true that вҲҶXвҶ’
X is a homotopy equivalence, as the earlier
example of the projections X0вҶҗX0Г—X1вҶ’X1 shows. Even with inclusion maps one
need not have вҲҶX вүғ
X if the base О“ is not contractible. A trivial example is the
diagram consisting of the two spaces вҲҶ0 and вҲҶ1 and two maps f0, f1 : вҲҶ0вҶ’вҲҶ1 that
happen to have the same image.
Thus one can expect the map вҲҶXвҶ’
X to be a homotopy equivalence only in
special circumstances. Here is one such situation:
Proposition 4G.2. When XU is the complex of spaces associated to an open cover
U = {Xi} of a paracompact space X , the map p : вҲҶXUвҶ’
XU = X is a homotopy
equivalence.
Proof: The realization вҲҶXU can also be described as the quotient space of the disjoint
union of all the products Xi0 вҲ©В·В·В· вҲ©Xin Г—вҲҶn , as the subscripts range over sets of
n + 1 distinct indices and n вүҘ0, with the identiп¬Ғcations over the faces of вҲҶn using
inclusions Xi0 вҲ©В·В·В· вҲ©Xin > Xi0 вҲ©В·В·В· вҲ©bXij вҲ©В·В·В· вҲ©Xin . From this viewpoint, points
of вҲҶXU in a given вҖҳп¬ҒberвҖҷ pвҲ’1(x) can be written as п¬Ғnite linear combinations
P
i tixi
where
P
i ti = 1 and xi is x regarded as a point of Xi , for those Xi вҖҷs that contain x .
Since X is paracompact there is a partition of unity subordinate to the cover
U.
This is a family of maps П•Оұ : XвҶ’[0, 1] satisfying three conditions: The sup-
port of each П•Оұ is contained in some Xi(Оұ) , only п¬Ғnitely many П•Оұ вҖҷs are nonzero
near each point of X , and
P
Оұ П•Оұ = 1. Deп¬Ғne a section s : XвҶ’вҲҶXU of p by setting
s(x) =
P
Оұ П•Оұ(x)xi(Оұ) . The п¬Ғgure shows the case X = S1 with a
cover by two arcs, the heavy line indicating the image of s . In the
general case the section s embeds X as a retract of вҲҶXU , and it
is a deformation retract since points in п¬Ғbers pвҲ’1(x) can move
linearly along line segments to s(x).
вҠ”вҠ“
Corollary 4G.3. If U is an open cover of a paracompact space X such that every
nonempty intersection of п¬Ғnitely many sets in U is contractible, then X is homotopy
equivalent to the nerve NU.
Proof: The proposition gives a homotopy equivalence X вүғвҲҶXU . Since the nonempty
п¬Ғnite intersections of sets in U are contractible, the earlier proposition implies that
the map вҲҶXUвҶ’О“ induced by sending each intersection to a point is a homotopy
equivalence. Since О“ is the barycentric subdivision of NU, the result follows.
вҠ”вҠ“

460
Chapter 4
Homotopy Theory
Let us conclude this section with a few comments about terminology. For some
diagrams of spaces such as sequences X1вҶ’X2вҶ’В·В·В· the amalgamation
X can be
regarded as the direct limit of the vertex spaces Xv with respect to the edge maps
fe . Following this cue, the space
X is commonly called the direct limit for arbitrary
diagrams, even п¬Ғnite ones. If one views
X as a direct limit, then вҲҶX becomes a sort
of homotopy direct limit. For reasons that are explained in the next section, direct
limits are often called вҖҳcolimits.вҖҷ This has given rise to the rather unfortunate name of
вҖҳhocolimвҖҷ for вҲҶX , short for вҖҳhomotopy colimit.вҖҷ In preference to this we have chosen
the term вҖҳrealization,вҖҷ both for its intrinsic merits and because вҲҶX is closely related
to what is called the geometric realization of a simplicial space.
Exercises
1. Show that for a sequence of maps X0
f1--вҶ’X1
f2--вҶ’В·В·В·, the inп¬Ғnite iterated mapping
cylinder M(f1, f2, В·В·В·), which is the union of the п¬Ғnite iterated mapping cylinders
M(f1, В·В·В· , fn), deformation retracts onto the mapping telescope.
2. Show that if X is a complex of spaces in which all the maps are homeomorphisms,
then the projection вҲҶXвҶ’О“ is a п¬Ғber bundle.
3. What is the nerve of the cover of a simplicial complex by the open stars of its
vertices? [See Lemma 2C.2.]
4. Show that Proposition 4G.2 and its corollary hold also for CW complexes and covers
by families of subcomplexes. [CW complexes are paracompact; see [VBKT].]
There is a very nice duality principle in homotopy theory, called EckmannвҖ“Hilton
duality in its more reп¬Ғned and systematic aspects, but which in its most basic form
involves the simple idea of reversing the direction of all arrows in a given construc-
tion. For example, if in the deп¬Ғnition of a п¬Ғbration as a map satisfying the homotopy
lifting property we reverse the direction of all the arrows, we obtain the dual notion of
a coп¬Ғbration. This is a map i : AвҶ’B satisfying the following prop-
erty: Given eg0 : BвҶ’X and a homotopy gt : AвҶ’X such that eg0i = g0 ,
вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҶ’
вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҶ’
вҲ’вҶ’
A
B
X
i
gt
g0
вҲј
there exists a homotopy egt : BвҶ’X such that egti = gt . In the special
case that i is the inclusion of a subspace, this is the homotopy extension property,
and the next proposition says that this is indeed the general case. So a coп¬Ғbration is
the same as an inclusion satisfying the homotopy extension property.
Proposition 4H.1. If i : AвҶ’B is a coп¬Ғbration, then i is injective, and in fact a homeo-
morphism onto its image.
