[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 4. Homotopy Theory
현재 소단원: 4.G.ex Exercises
직전 소단원: 「4.G Gluing Constructions」
[연습문제]
460
Chapter 4
Homotopy Theory
Let us conclude this section with a few comments about terminology. For some
diagrams of spaces such as sequences X1→X2→··· the amalgamation
X can be
regarded as the direct limit of the vertex spaces Xv with respect to the edge maps
fe . Following this cue, the space
X is commonly called the direct limit for arbitrary
diagrams, even ﬁnite ones. If one views
X as a direct limit, then ∆X becomes a sort
of homotopy direct limit. For reasons that are explained in the next section, direct
limits are often called ‘colimits.’ This has given rise to the rather unfortunate name of
‘hocolim’ for ∆X , short for ‘homotopy colimit.’ In preference to this we have chosen
the term ‘realization,’ both for its intrinsic merits and because ∆X is closely related
to what is called the geometric realization of a simplicial space.
Exercises
1. Show that for a sequence of maps X0
f1--→X1
f2--→···, the inﬁnite iterated mapping
cylinder M(f1, f2, ···), which is the union of the ﬁnite iterated mapping cylinders
M(f1, ··· , fn), deformation retracts onto the mapping telescope.
2. Show that if X is a complex of spaces in which all the maps are homeomorphisms,
then the projection ∆X→Γ is a ﬁber bundle.
3. What is the nerve of the cover of a simplicial complex by the open stars of its
vertices? [See Lemma 2C.2.]
4. Show that Proposition 4G.2 and its corollary hold also for CW complexes and covers
by families of subcomplexes. [CW complexes are paracompact; see [VBKT].]
There is a very nice duality principle in homotopy theory, called Eckmann–Hilton
duality in its more reﬁned and systematic aspects, but which in its most basic form
involves the simple idea of reversing the direction of all arrows in a given construc-
tion. For example, if in the deﬁnition of a ﬁbration as a map satisfying the homotopy
lifting property we reverse the direction of all the arrows, we obtain the dual notion of
a coﬁbration. This is a map i : A→B satisfying the following prop-
erty: Given eg0 : B→X and a homotopy gt : A→X such that eg0i = g0 ,
−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
−→
A
B
X
i
gt
g0
∼
there exists a homotopy egt : B→X such that egti = gt . In the special
case that i is the inclusion of a subspace, this is the homotopy extension property,
and the next proposition says that this is indeed the general case. So a coﬁbration is
the same as an inclusion satisfying the homotopy extension property.
Proposition 4H.1. If i : A→B is a coﬁbration, then i is injective, and in fact a homeo-
morphism onto its image.

Eckmann–Hilton Duality
Section 4.H
461
Proof: Consider the mapping cylinder Mi , the quotient of A×I ⨿B in which (a, 1) is
identiﬁed with i(a). Let gt : A→Mi be the homotopy mapping a ∈A to the image of
(a, 1 −t) ∈A×I in Mi , and let eg0 be the inclusion B> Mi . The coﬁbration property
gives egt : B→Mi with egti = gt . Restricting to a ﬁxed t > 0, this implies i is injective
since gt is. Furthermore, since gt is a homeomorphism onto its image A×{1 −t},
the relation egti = gt implies that the map g−1
t
egt : i(A)→A is a continuous inverse of
i : A→i(A).
⊔⊓
Many constructions for ﬁbrations have analogs for coﬁbrations, and vice versa.
For example, for an arbitrary map f : A→B the inclusion A > Mf is readily seen to
be a coﬁbration, so the analog of the factorization A> Ef→B of f into a homotopy
equivalence followed by a ﬁbration is the factorization A>Mf→B into a coﬁbration
followed by a homotopy equivalence. Even the deﬁnition of Mf is in some way dual to
the deﬁnition of Ef , since Ef can be deﬁned as a pullback and Mf can be deﬁned as
a dual pushout. In general, the pushout of maps
−−−−−→
−−−−→
−−→
−−→
A
M
A
I
B
f
×
−−−−−→
−−−−→
−→
−−→
E
B
A
I
B
f
f : Z→X and g : Z→Y is deﬁned as the quotient
of X ⨿Y under the identiﬁcations f (z) ∼g(z).
Thus the pushout is a quotient of X ⨿Y , while the pullback of maps X→Z and Y→Z
is a subobject of X×Y , so we see here two instances of duality: a duality between
disjoint union and product, and a duality between subobjects and quotients. The ﬁrst
of these is easily explained, since a collection of maps Xα→X is equivalent to a map
`
αXα→X , while a collection of maps X→Xα is equivalent to a map X→
Q
αXα . The
notation
`
for the ‘coproduct’ was chosen to indicate that it is dual to
Q
. If we were
dealing with basepointed spaces and maps, the coproduct would be wedge sum. In
the category of abelian groups the coproduct is direct sum.
The duality between subobjects and quotient objects is clear for abelian groups,
where subobjects are kernels and quotient objects cokernels. The strict topological
analog of a kernel is a ﬁber of a ﬁbration. Dually, the topological analog of a cokernel
is the coﬁber B/A of a coﬁbration A>B . If we make an arbitrary map f : A→B into
a coﬁbration A > Mf , the coﬁber is the mapping cone Cf = Mf /(A×{0}).
In the diagram showing Ef and Mf as pullback and pushout, there also appears to
be some sort of duality involving the terms A×I and BI . This leads us to ask whether
X×I and XI are in some way dual. Indeed, if we ignore topology and just think set-
theoretically, this is an instance of the familiar product–coproduct duality since the
product of copies of X indexed by I is XI , all functions I→X , while the coproduct
of copies of X indexed by I is X×I , the disjoint union of the sets X×{t} for t ∈I .
Switching back from the category of sets to the topological category, we can view XI
as a ‘continuous product’ of copies of X and X×I as a ‘continuous coproduct.’
On a less abstract level, the fact that maps A×I→B are the same as maps A→BI
indicates a certain duality between A×I and BI .
This leads to a duality between
