[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 4. Homotopy Theory
현재 소단원: 4.H.ex Exercises
직전 소단원: 「4.H Eckmann-Hilton Duality」
[연습문제]
466
Chapter 4
Homotopy Theory
Fβ ||Sn×{0} to attach en+1
β
, and then Fβ ||Sn×I gives hn on en+1
β
and Fβ gives an
extension of f over the cone on en+1
β
.
This construction assures that f∗: Hn+1(Xn+1, Xn)→Hn+1(Y, Xn) is an isomor-
phism, so from the ﬁve-lemma applied to the long exact sequences of these pairs we
deduce that f∗: Hi(Xn+1)→Hi(Y) is an isomorphism for i ≤n + 1. This ﬁnishes the
induction step. We may assume the maps fα and Fβ are cellular, so X =
S
n Xn is
a CW complex with subcomplexes Xn . Since f : X→Y is a homology isomorphism
between simply-connected CW complexes, it is a homotopy equivalence.
⊔⊓
As an example, suppose that Y is a simply-connected CW complex having all its
homology groups free. Then the Moore spaces used in the construction of X can
be taken to be wedges of spheres, and so Xn is obtained from Xn−1 by attaching an
n cell for each Z summand of Hn(Y). The attaching maps may be taken to be cellular,
making X into a CW complex whose cellular chain complex has trivial boundary maps.
Similarly, ﬁnite cyclic summands of Hn(Y) can be realized by wedge summands of
the form Sn−1 ∪en in M(Hn(Y), n −1), contributing an n cell and an (n + 1) cell to
X . This is Proposition 4C.1, but the present result is stronger because it tells us that
a ﬁnite cyclic summand of Hn can be realized in one step by attaching the cone on a
Moore space M(Zk, n −1), rather than in two steps of attaching an n cell and then
an (n + 1) cell.
Exercises
1. Show that if A>X is a coﬁbration of compact Hausdorff spaces, then for any space
Y , the map Y X→Y A obtained by restriction of functions is a ﬁbration. [If A > X is
a coﬁbration, so is A×Y > X×Y for any space Y .]
2.
Consider a pushout diagram as at the right, where B ⊔f X
−−−−−→
−−−−→
A
B
X
X
B
f
f
>
>
⊔
is B with X attached along A via f . Show that if A > X is a
coﬁbration, so is B > B ⊔f X .
3. For ﬁbrations E1→B and E2→B , show that a ﬁber-preserving map E1→E2 that
is a homotopy equivalence is in fact a ﬁber homotopy equivalence. [This is dual to
Proposition 0.19.]
4. Deﬁne the dual of an iterated mapping cylinder precisely, in terms of maps from
∆n , and use this to give a deﬁnition of ∇X , the dual of ∆X , for X a complex of spaces.
It sometimes happens that suspending a space has the effect of simplifying its
homotopy type, as the suspension becomes homotopy equivalent to a wedge sum of

Stable Splittings of Spaces
Section 4.I
467
smaller spaces. Much of the interest in such stable splittings comes from the fact
that they provide a geometric explanation for algebraic splittings of homology and
cohomology groups, as well as other algebraic invariants of spaces that are unaffected
by suspension such as the cohomology operations studied in §4.L.
The simplest example of a stable splitting occurs for the torus S1×S1 . Here the
reduced suspension Σ(S1×S1) is homotopy equivalent to S2∨S2∨S3 since Σ(S1×S1)
is S2 ∨S2 with a 3 cell attached by the suspension of the attaching map of the 2 cell
of the torus, but the latter attaching map is the commutator of the two inclusions
S1 > S1 , and the suspension of this commutator is trivial since it lies in the abelian
group π2(S2 ∨S2).
By an easy geometric argument we will prove more generally:
Proposition 4I.1. If X and Y are CW complexes, then Σ(X×Y) ≃ΣX∨ΣY ∨Σ(X∧Y).
For example, Σ(Sm×Sn) ≃Sm+1 ∨Sn+1 ∨Sm+n+1 . In view of the cup product
structure on H∗(Sm×Sn) there can be no such splitting of Sm×Sn before suspension.
Proof: Consider the join X ∗Y deﬁned in Chapter 0, consisting of all line segments
joining points in X to points in Y . For our present purposes it is convenient to use
the reduced version of the join, obtained by collapsing to a point the line segment
joining the basepoints x0 ∈X and y0 ∈Y . We will still denote this reduced join
by X ∗Y . Consider the space obtained
from X ∗Y by attaching reduced cones
CX and CY to the copies of X and Y
at the two ends of X ∗Y .
If we col-
CX
CY
X Y
∗
X
Y
lapse each of these cones to a point, we
get the reduced suspension Σ(X×Y).
Since each cone is contractible, collapsing the cones gives a homotopy equivalence
X ∗Y ∪CX ∪CY ≃Σ(X×Y). Inside X ∗Y there are also cones x0 ∗Y and X ∗y0
intersecting in a point. Collapsing these cones converts X ∗Y into Σ(X ∧Y) and
X ∗Y ∪CX ∪CY into Σ(X ∧Y) ∨ΣX ∨ΣY .
⊔⊓
This result can be applied inductively to obtain splittings for suspensions of prod-
ucts of more than two spaces, using the fact that reduced suspension is smash product
with S1 , and smash product is associative and commutative. For example,
Σ(X×Y ×Z) ≃ΣX ∨ΣY ∨ΣZ ∨Σ(X ∧Y) ∨Σ(X ∧Z) ∨Σ(Y ∧Z) ∨Σ(X ∧Y ∧Z)
Our next example involves the reduced product J(X) deﬁned in §3.2. An inter-
esting case is J(Sn), which has a CW structure of the form Sn ∪e2n ∪e3n ∪···. All the
cells ein for i > 1 are attached nontrivially since H∗(J(Sn); Q) is a polynomial ring
Q[x] for n even and a tensor product Q[x]⊗ΛQ[y] for n odd. However, after we
suspend to ΣJ(Sn), it is a rather surprising fact that all the attaching maps become
trivial:
