[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 4. Homotopy Theory
현재 소단원: 4.K.ex Exercises
직전 소단원: 「4.K The Dold-Thom Theorem」
[연습문제]
486
Chapter 4
Homotopy Theory
This argument works equally well over any open subset of Bn −Bn−1 that is path-
connected, in particular over U ∩(Bn −Bn−1), so via Lemma 4K.3(a) this ﬁnishes the
proof that SP(A)→SP(X)→SP(X/A) is a quasiﬁbration.
Since the homotopy axiom is obvious, this gives us the ﬁrst two of the three ax-
ioms needed for the groups hi(X) = πiSP(X) to deﬁne a reduced homology theory.
There remains only the wedge sum axiom, hi(
W
α Xα) ≈
L
α hi(Xα), but this is im-
mediate from the evident fact that SP(
W
α Xα) =
Q
αSP(Xα), where this is the ‘weak’
product, the union of the products of ﬁnitely many factors.
The homology theory h∗(X) is deﬁned on the category of connected, basepointed
simplicial complexes, with basepoint-preserving maps. The coefﬁcients of this homol-
ogy theory, the groups hi(Sn), are the same as for ordinary homology with Z coefﬁ-
cients since we know this is true for n = 2 by the homeomorphism SP(S2) ≈CP∞,
and there are isomorphisms hi(X) ≈hi+1(ΣX) in any reduced homology theory.
If the homology theory h∗(X) were deﬁned on the category of all simplicial com-
plexes, without basepoints, then Theorem 4.59 would give natural isomorphisms
hi(X) ≈Hi(X; Z) for all X , and the proof would be complete. However, it is easy
to achieve this by deﬁning a new homology theory h′
i(X) = hi+1(ΣX), since the sus-
pension of an arbitrary complex is connected and the suspension of an arbitrary map
is basepoint-preserving, taking the basepoint to be one of the suspension points. Since
h′
i(X) is naturally isomorphic to hi(X) if X is connected, we are done.
⊔⊓
It is worth noting that the map πi(X)→πiSP(X) = Hi(X; Z) induced by the
inclusion X = SP1(X)> SP(X) is the Hurewicz homomorphism. For by deﬁnition of
the Hurewicz homomorphism and naturality this reduces to the case X = Si , where
the map SP1(Si) > SP(Si) induces on πi a homomorphism Z→Z, which one just
has to check is an isomorphism, the Hurewicz homomorphism being determined only
up to sign. The suspension isomorphism gives a further reduction to the case i = 1,
where the inclusion SP1(S1)> SP(S1) is a homotopy equivalence, hence induces an
isomorphism on π1 .
Exercises
1. Show that Corollary 4K.2 remains valid when X and Y are CW complexes and the
subspaces Ui and Vi are subcomplexes rather than open sets.
2. Show that a simplicial map f : K→L is a homotopy equivalence if f −1(x) is con-
tractible for all x ∈L. [Consider the cover of L by open stars of simplices and the
cover of K by the preimages of these open stars.]
3. Show that SPn(I) = ∆n .
4. Show that SP2(S1) is a M¨obius band, and that this is consistent with the description
of SP2(Sn) as a mapping cone given in Example 4K.5.

Steenrod Squares and Powers
Section 4.L
487
5. A map p : E→B with B not necessarily path-connected is deﬁned to be a quasiﬁ-
bration if the following equivalent conditions are satisﬁed:
(i) For all b ∈B and x0 ∈p−1(b), the map p∗: πi(E, p−1(b), x0)→πi(B, b) is an
isomorphism for i > 0 and π0(p−1(b), x0)→π0(E, x0)→π0(B, b) is exact.
(ii) The inclusion of the ﬁber p−1(b) into the homotopy ﬁber Fb of p over b is a
weak homotopy equivalence for all b ∈B .
(iii) The restriction of p over each path-component of B is a quasiﬁbration according
to the deﬁnition in this section.
Show these three conditions are equivalent, and prove Lemma 4K.3 for quasiﬁbrations
over non-pathconnected base spaces.
6. Let X be a complex of spaces over a ∆complex Γ , as deﬁned in §4.G. Show that
the natural projection ∆X→Γ is a quasiﬁbration if all the maps in X associated to
edges of Γ are weak homotopy equivalences.
The main objects of study in this section are certain homomorphisms called Steen-
rod squares and Steenrod powers:
Sqi : Hn(X; Z2)→Hn+i(X; Z2)
P i : Hn(X; Zp)→Hn+2i(p−1)(X; Zp)
for odd primes p
The terms ‘squares’ and ‘powers’ arise from the fact that Sqi and P i are related to
the maps α,α2 and α,αp sending a cohomology class α to the 2 fold or p fold
cup product with itself. Unlike cup products, however, the operations Sqi and P i are
stable, that is, invariant under suspension.
The operations Sqi generate an algebra A2 , called the Steenrod algebra, such that
H∗(X; Z2) is a module over A2 for every space X , and maps between spaces induce
homomorphisms of A2 modules. Similarly, for odd primes p, H∗(X; Zp) is a module
over a corresponding Steenrod algebra Ap generated by the P i ’s and Bockstein ho-
momorphisms. Like the ring structure given by cup product, these module structures
impose strong constraints on spaces and maps. For example, we will use them to
show that there do not exist spaces X with H∗(X; Z) a polynomial ring Z[α] unless
α has dimension 2 or 4, where there are the familiar examples of CP∞and HP∞.
This rather lengthy section is divided into two main parts. The ﬁrst part describes
the basic properties of Steenrod squares and powers and gives a number of examples
and applications. The second part is devoted to constructing the squares and powers
and showing they satisfy the basic properties listed in the ﬁrst part. More extensive
