[문서 맥락]
책: Algebraic Topology / 저자: Allen Hatcher
챕터: 4. Homotopy Theory
현재 소단원: 4.appendix.1 Topology of Cell Complexes (분할 part 1)
직전 소단원: 「4.appendix Appendix」
[본문]
Topology of Cell Complexes
Here we collect a number of basic topological facts about CW complexes for con-
venient reference. A few related facts about manifolds are also proved.
Let us ﬁrst recall from Chapter 0 that a CW complex is a space X constructed in
the following way:
(1) Start with a discrete set X0 , the 0 cells of X .
(2) Inductively, form the n skeleton Xn from Xn−1 by attaching n cells en
α via maps
ϕα : Sn−1→Xn−1 . This means that Xn is the quotient space of Xn−1`
α Dn
α under
the identiﬁcations x ∼ϕα(x) for x ∈∂Dn
α . The cell en
α is the homeomorphic
image of Dn
α −∂Dn
α under the quotient map.
(3) X =
S
n Xn with the weak topology: A set A ⊂X is open (or closed) iff A ∩Xn is
open (or closed) in Xn for each n.
Note that condition (3) is superﬂuous when X is ﬁnite-dimensional, so that X = Xn
for some n. For if A is open in X = Xn , the deﬁnition of the quotient topology on
Xn implies that A ∩Xn−1 is open in Xn−1 , and then by the same reasoning A ∩Xn−2
is open in Xn−2 , and similarly for all the skeleta Xn−i .
Each cell en
α has its characteristic map Φα , which is by deﬁnition the composi-
tion Dn
α > Xn−1`
α Dn
α→Xn > X . This is continuous since it is a composition of
continuous maps, the inclusion Xn > X being continuous by (3). The restriction of
Φα to the interior of Dn
α is a homeomorphism onto en
α .
An alternative way to describe the topology on X is to say that a set A ⊂X is
open (or closed) iff Φ−1
α (A) is open (or closed) in Dn
α for each characteristic map Φα .
In one direction this follows from continuity of the Φα ’s, and in the other direction,
suppose Φ−1
α (A) is open in Dn
α for each Φα , and suppose by induction on n that
A∩Xn−1 is open in Xn−1 . Then since Φ−1
α (A) is open in Dn
α for all α, A∩Xn is open
in Xn by the deﬁnition of the quotient topology on Xn . Hence by (3), A is open in X .
A consequence of this characterization of the topology on X is that X is a quotient
space of
`
n,α Dn
α .

520
Appendix
Topology of Cell Complexes
A subcomplex of a CW complex X is a subspace A ⊂X which is a union of cells
of X , such that the closure of each cell in A is contained in A. Thus for each cell
in A, the image of its attaching map is contained in A, so A is itself a CW complex.
Its CW complex topology is the same as the topology induced from X , as one sees
by noting inductively that the two topologies agree on An = A ∩Xn . It is easy to
see by induction over skeleta that a subcomplex is a closed subspace. Conversely, a
subcomplex could be deﬁned as a closed subspace which is a union of cells.
A ﬁnite CW complex, that is, one with only ﬁnitely many cells, is compact since
attaching a single cell preserves compactness. A sort of converse to this is:
Proposition A.1. A compact subspace of a CW complex is contained in a ﬁnite sub-
complex.
Proof: First we show that a compact set C in a CW complex X can meet only ﬁnitely
many cells of X . Suppose on the contrary that there is an inﬁnite sequence of points
xi ∈C all lying in distinct cells. Then the set S = {x1, x2, ···} is closed in X . Namely,
assuming S ∩Xn−1 is closed in Xn−1 by induction on n, then for each cell en
α of X ,
ϕ−1
α (S) is closed in ∂Dn
α , and Φ−1
α (S) consists of at most one more point in Dn
α , so
Φ−1
α (S) is closed in Dn
α . Therefore S∩Xn is closed in Xn for each n, hence S is closed
in X . The same argument shows that any subset of S is closed, so S has the discrete
topology. But it is compact, being a closed subset of the compact set C . Therefore S
must be ﬁnite, a contradiction.
Since C is contained in a ﬁnite union of cells, it sufﬁces to show that a ﬁnite
union of cells is contained in a ﬁnite subcomplex of X . A ﬁnite union of ﬁnite sub-
complexes is again a ﬁnite subcomplex, so this reduces to showing that a single cell en
α
is contained in a ﬁnite subcomplex. The image of the attaching map ϕα for en
α is com-
pact, hence by induction on dimension this image is contained in a ﬁnite subcomplex
A ⊂Xn−1 . So en
α is contained in the ﬁnite subcomplex A ∪en
α .
⊔⊓
Now we can explain the mysterious letters ‘CW,’ which refer to the following two
properties satisﬁed by CW complexes:
(1) Closure-ﬁniteness: The closure of each cell meets only ﬁnitely many other cells.
This follows from the preceding proposition since the closure of a cell is compact,
being the image of a characteristic map.
(2) Weak topology: A set is closed iff it meets the closure of each cell in a closed set.
For if a set meets the closure of each cell in a closed set, it pulls back to a closed
set under each characteristic map, hence is closed by an earlier remark.
In J. H.C.Whitehead’s original deﬁnition of CW complexes these two properties played
a more central role. The following proposition contains essentially this deﬁnition.

Topology of Cell Complexes
Appendix
521
Proposition A.2. Given a Hausdorff space X and a family of maps Φα : Dn
α→X ,
then these maps are the characteristic maps of a CW complex structure on X iff :
(i) Each Φα is injective on int Dn
α , hence Φα restricts to a homeomorphism from
int Dn
α onto a cell en
α ⊂X . All these cells are disjoint, and their union is X .
(ii) For each cell en
α , Φα(∂Dn
α) is contained in the union of a ﬁnite number of cells of
dimension less than n.
(iii) A subset of X is closed iff it meets the closure of each cell of X in a closed set.
The ‘hence’ in (i) follows from the fact that Φα maps the compact set Dn
α to a
Hausdorff space, so since Φα takes compact sets to compact sets, it takes closed
sets to closed sets, which means that Φ−1
α : en
α→int Dn
α is continuous. By the same
compactness argument, condition (iii) can be restated as saying that a set C ⊂X is
closed iff Φ−1
α (C) is closed in Dn
α for all α. In particular, (iii) is automatic if there
are only ﬁnitely many cells since the projection
`
α Dn
α→X is a map from a compact
space onto a Hausdorff space, hence is a quotient map.
For an example where all the conditions except the ﬁniteness hypothesis in (ii)
are satisﬁed, take X to be D2 with its interior as a 2 cell and each point of ∂D2 as
a 0 cell. The identity map of D2 serves as the Φα for the 2 cell. Condition (iii) is
satisﬁed since it is a nontrivial condition only for the 2 cell.
Proof: We have already taken care of the ‘only if’ implication.
For the converse,
suppose inductively that Xn−1 , the union of all cells of dimension less than n, is a
CW complex with the appropriate Φα ’s as characteristic maps. The induction can start
with X−1 = ∅. Let f : Xn−1`
α Dn
α→Xn be given by the inclusion on Xn−1 and the
maps Φα for all the n cells of X . This is a continuous surjection, and if we can show
it is a quotient map, then Xn will be obtained from Xn−1 by attaching the n cells en
α .
Thus if C ⊂Xn is such that f −1(C) is closed, we need to show that C ∩e m
β
is closed
for all cells em
β of X , the bar denoting closure.
There are three cases. If m < n then f −1(C) closed implies C ∩Xn−1 closed,
hence C ∩e m
β
is closed since e m
β ⊂Xn−1 . If m = n then em
β is one of the cells en
α , so
f −1(C) closed implies f −1(C) ∩Dn
α is closed, hence compact, hence its image C ∩e n
α
under f is compact and therefore closed. Finally there is the case m > n. Then
C ⊂Xn implies C ∩e m
β ⊂Φβ(∂Dm
β ). The latter space is contained in a ﬁnite union of
e ℓ
γ ’s with ℓ< m. By induction on m, each C ∩e ℓ
γ is closed. Hence the intersection
of C with the union of the ﬁnite collection of e ℓ
γ ’s is closed. Intersecting this closed
set with e m
β , we conclude that C ∩e m
β
is closed.
It remains only to check that X has the weak topology with respect to the Xn ’s,
that is, a set in X is closed iff it intersects each Xn in a closed set. The preceding
argument with C = Xn shows that Xn is closed, so a closed set intersects each Xn
in a closed set. Conversely, if a set C intersects Xn in a closed set, then C intersects
each e n
α in a closed set, so C is closed in X by (iii).
⊔⊓

522
Appendix
Topology of Cell Complexes
Next we describe a convenient way of constructing open neighborhoods Nε(A) of
subsets A of a CW complex X , where ε is a function assigning a number εα > 0 to each
cell en
α of X . The construction is inductive over the skeleta Xn , so suppose we have
already constructed Nn
ε (A), a neighborhood of A ∩Xn in Xn , starting the process
with N0
ε (A) = A ∩X0 . Then we deﬁne Nn+1
ε
(A) by specifying its preimage under
the characteristic map Φα : Dn+1→X of each cell en+1
α
, namely, Φ−1
α
 Nn+1
ε
(A)

is the
union of two parts: an open εα neighborhood of Φ−1
α (A) −∂Dn+1 in Dn+1 −∂Dn+1 ,
and a product (1 −εα, 1]×Φ−1
α
 Nn
ε (A)

with respect to ‘spherical’ coordinates (r, θ)
in Dn+1 , where r ∈[0, 1] is the radial coordinate and θ lies in ∂Dn+1 = Sn . Then we
deﬁne Nε(A) =
S
n Nn
ε (A). This is an open set in X since it pulls back to an open set
under each characteristic map.
Proposition A.3. CW complexes are normal, and in particular, Hausdorff.
Proof: Points are closed in a CW complex X since they pull back to closed sets under
all characteristic maps Φα . For disjoint closed sets A and B in X , we show that Nε(A)
and Nε(B) are disjoint for small enough εα ’s. In the inductive process for building
these open sets, assume Nn
ε (A) and Nn
ε (B) have been chosen to be disjoint. For a
characteristic map Φα : Dn+1→X , observe that Φ−1
α
 Nn
ε (A)

and Φ−1
α (B) are a positive
distance apart, since otherwise by compactness we would have a sequence in Φ−1
α (B)
converging to a point of Φ−1
α (B) in ∂Dn+1 of distance zero from Φ−1
α
 Nn
ε (A)

, but
this is impossible since Φ−1
α
 Nn
ε (B)

is a neighborhood of Φ−1
α (B) ∩∂Dn+1 in ∂Dn+1
disjoint from Φ−1
α
 Nn
ε (A)

. Similarly, Φ−1
α
 Nn
ε (B)

and Φ−1
α (A) are a positive distance
apart. Also, Φ−1
α (A) and Φ−1
α (B) are a positive distance apart. So a small enough εα
will make Φ−1
α
 Nn+1
ε
(A)

disjoint from Φ−1
α
 Nn+1
ε
(B)

in Dn+1 .
⊔⊓
Proposition A.4. Each point in a CW complex has arbitrarily small contractible open
neighborhoods, so CW complexes are locally contractible.
Proof: Given a point x in a CW complex X and a neighborhood U of x in X , we
can choose the εα ’s small enough so that Nε(x) ⊂U by requiring that the closure of
Nn
ε (x) be contained in U for each n. It remains to see that Nε(x) is contractible. If
x ∈Xm −Xm−1 and n > m we can construct a deformation retraction of Nn
ε (x) onto
Nn−1
ε
(x) by sliding outward along radial segments in cells en
β , the images under the
characteristic maps Φβ of radial segments in Dn . A deformation retraction of Nε(x)
onto Nm
ε (x) is then obtained by performing the deformation retraction of Nn
ε (x)
onto Nn−1
ε
(x) during the t interval [1/2n, 1/2n−1], points of Nn
ε (x)−Nn−1
ε
(x) being
stationary outside this t interval. Finally, Nm
ε (x) is an open ball about x , and so
deformation retracts onto x .
⊔⊓
In particular, CW complexes are locally path-connected. So a CW complex is path-
connected iff it is connected.

Topology of Cell Complexes
Appendix
523
Proposition A.5. For a subcomplex A of a CW complex X , the open neighborhood
Nε(A) deformation retracts onto A if εα < 1 for all α.
Proof: In each cell of X −A, Nε(A) is a product neighborhood of the boundary of
this cell, so a deformation retraction of Nε(A) onto A can be constructed just as in
the previous proof.
⊔⊓
Note that for subcomplexes A and B of X , we have Nε(A) ∩Nε(B) = Nε(A ∩B).
This implies for example that the van Kampen theorem and Mayer-Vietoris sequences
hold for decompositions X = A ∪B into subcomplexes A and B as well as into open
sets A and B .
A map f : X→Y with domain a CW complex is continuous iff its restrictions to
the closures e n
α of all cells en
α are continuous, and it is useful to know that the same
is true for homotopies ft : X→Y .
With this objective in mind, let us introduce a
little terminology. A topological space X is said to be generated by a collection of
subspaces Xα if X =
S
α Xα and a set A ⊂X is closed iff A ∩Xα is closed in Xα for
each α. Equivalently, we could say ‘open’ instead of ‘closed’ here, but ‘closed’ is more
convenient for our present purposes. As noted earlier, though not in these words,
a CW complex X is generated by the closures e n
α of its cells en
α . Since every ﬁnite
subcomplex of X is a ﬁnite union of closures e n
α , X is also generated by its ﬁnite
subcomplexes. It follows that X is also generated by its compact subspaces, or more
brieﬂy, X is compactly generated.
Proposition A.15 later in the Appendix asserts that if X is a compactly generated
Hausdorff space and Z is locally compact, then X×Z , with the product topology, is
compactly generated. In particular, X×I is compactly generated if X is a CW complex.
Since every compact set in X×I is contained in the product of a compact subspace
of X with I , hence in the product of a ﬁnite subcomplex of X with I , such product
subspaces also generate X×I .
Since such a product subspace is a ﬁnite union of
products e n
α ×I , it is also true that X×I is generated by its subspaces e n
α ×I . This
implies that a homotopy F : X×I→Y is continuous iff its restrictions to the subspaces
e n
α ×I are continuous, which is the statement we were seeking.
Products of CW Complexes
There are some unexpected point-set-topological subtleties that arise with prod-
ucts of CW complexes. As we shall show, the product of two CW complexes does have
a natural CW structure, but its topology is in general ﬁner, with more open sets, than
the product topology. However, the distinctions between the two topologies are rather
small, and indeed nonexistent in most cases of interest, so there is no real problem
for algebraic topology.
Given a space X and a collection of subspaces Xα whose union is X , these sub-
spaces generate a possibly ﬁner topology on X by deﬁning a set A ⊂X to be open

524
Appendix
Topology of Cell Complexes
iff A ∩Xα is open in Xα for all α. The axioms for a topology are easily veriﬁed for
this deﬁnition. In case {Xα} is the collection of compact subsets of X , we write Xc
for this new compactly generated topology. It is easy to see that X and Xc have the
same compact subsets, and the two induced topologies on these compact subsets co-
incide. If X is compact, or even locally compact, then X = Xc , that is, X is compactly
generated.
Theorem A.6. For CW complexes X and Y with characteristic maps Φα and Ψβ ,
the product maps Φα×Ψβ are the characteristic maps for a CW complex structure
on (X×Y)c . If either X or Y is compact or more generally locally compact, then
(X×Y)c = X×Y . Also, (X×Y)c = X×Y if both X and Y have countably many
cells.
Proof: For the ﬁrst statement it sufﬁces to check that the three conditions in Propo-
sition A.2 are satisﬁed when we take the space ‘X ’ there to be (X×Y)c . The ﬁrst two
conditions are obvious. For the third, which says that (X×Y)c is generated by the
products e m
α ×e n
β , observe that every compact set in X×Y is contained in the prod-
uct of its projections onto X and Y , and these projections are compact and hence
contained in ﬁnite subcomplexes of X and Y , so the original compact set is contained
in a ﬁnite union of products e m
α ×e n
β . Hence the products e m
α ×e n
β generate (X×Y)c .
The second assertion of the theorem is a special case of Proposition A.15, hav-
ing nothing to do with CW complexes, which says that a product X×Y is compactly
generated if X is compactly generated Hausdorff and Y is locally compact.
For the last statement of the theorem, suppose X and Y each have at most count-
ably many cells. For an open set W ⊂(X×Y)c and a point (a, b) ∈W we need to ﬁnd
a product U ×V ⊂W with U an open neighborhood of a in X and V an open neigh-
borhood of b in Y . Choose ﬁnite subcomplexes X1 ⊂X2 ⊂··· of X with X =
S
i Xi ,
and similarly for Y . We may assume a ∈X1 and b ∈Y1 . Since the two topologies
agree on X1×Y1 , there is a compact product neighborhood K1×L1 ⊂W of (a, b)
in X1×Y1 . Assuming inductively that Ki×Li ⊂W has been constructed in Xi×Yi ,
we would like to construct Ki+1×Li+1 ⊂W as a compact neighborhood of Ki×Li in
Xi+1×Yi+1 . To do this, we ﬁrst choose for each x ∈Ki compact neighborhoods Kx
of x in Xi+1 and Lx of Li in Yi+1 such that Kx×Lx ⊂W , using the compactness
of Li . By compactness of Ki , a ﬁnite number of the Kx ’s cover Ki . Let Ki+1 be the
union of these Kx ’s and let Li+1 be the intersection of the corresponding Lx ’s. This
deﬁnes the desired Ki+1×Li+1 . Let Ui be the interior of Ki in Xi , so Ui ⊂Ui+1 for
each i. The union U =
S
i Ui is then open in X since it intersects each Xi in a union
of open sets and the Xi ’s generate X . In the same way the Li ’s yield an open set V
in Y . Thus we have a product of open sets U ×V ⊂W containing (a, b).
⊔⊓
We will describe now an example from [Dowker 1952] where the product topology
on X×Y differs from the CW topology. Both X and Y will be graphs consisting of

Topology of Cell Complexes
Appendix
525
inﬁnitely many edges emanating from a single vertex, with uncountably many edges
for X and countably many for Y .
Let X =
W
s Is where Is is a copy of the interval [0, 1] and the index s ranges
over all inﬁnite sequences s = (s1, s2, ···) of positive integers. The wedge sum is
formed at the 0 endpoint of Is . Similarly we let Y =
W
j Ij but with j varying just
over positive integers. Let psj be the point (1/sj, 1/sj) ∈Is ×Ij ⊂X×Y and let P be
the union of all these points psj . Thus P consists of a single point in each 2 cell of
X×Y , so P is closed in the CW topology on X×Y . We will show it is not closed in the
product topology by showing that (x0, y0) lies in its closure, where x0 is the common
endpoint of the intervals Is and y0 is the common endpoint of the intervals Ij .
A basic open set containing (x0, y0) in the product topology has the form U ×V
where U =
W
s [0, as) and V =
W
j [0, bj). It sufﬁces to show that P has nonempty
intersection with U ×V . Choose a sequence t = (t1, t2, ···) with tj > j and tj > 1/bj
for all j , and choose an integer k > 1/at . Then tk > k > 1/at hence 1/tk < at . We
also have 1/tk < bk . So (1/tk, 1/tk) is a point of P that lies in [0, at)×[0, bk) and
hence in U ×V .
Euclidean Neighborhood Retracts
At certain places in this book it is desirable to know that a given compact space
is a retract of a ﬁnite simplicial complex, or equivalently (as we shall see) a retract of
a neighborhood in some Euclidean space. For example, this condition occurs in the
Lefschetz ﬁxed point theorem, and it was used in the proof of Alexander duality. So
let us study this situation in more detail.
Theorem A.7. A compact subspace K of Rn is a retract of some neighborhood iff K
is locally contractible in the weak sense that for each x ∈K and each neighborhood
U of x in K there exists a neighborhood V ⊂U of x such that the inclusion V > U
is nullhomotopic.
Note that if K is a retract of some neighborhood, then it is a retract of every
smaller neighborhood, just by restriction of the retraction. So it does not matter if we
require the neighborhoods to be open. Similarly it does not matter if the neighbor-
hoods U and V in the statement of the theorem are required to be open.
Proof: Let us do the harder half ﬁrst, constructing a retraction of a neighborhood
of K onto K under the local contractibility assumption. The ﬁrst step is to put a
CW structure on the open set X = Rn −K , with the size of the cells approaching
zero near K . Consider the subdivision of Rn into unit cubes of dimension n with
vertices at the points with integer coordinates. Call this collection of cubes C0 . For
an integer k > 0, we can subdivide the cubes of C0 by taking n dimensional cubes of
edgelength 1/2k with vertices having coordinates of the form i/2k for i ∈Z. Denote
this collection of cubes by Ck . Let A0 ⊂C0 be the set of cubes disjoint from K , and
