[문서 맥락]
책: Lectures on Polytopes / 저자: Günter M. Ziegler
챕터: 4. Steinitz' Theorem for 3-Polytopes
현재 소단원: 4.2 Simple ΔY Transformations Preserve Realizability
직전 소단원: 「4.1 3-Connected Planar Graphs」
[본문]
4.2 Simple ∆Y Transformations Preserve Realizability
107
However, a ∆Y transformation might create series or parallel edges, which
can then be SP-reduced.
We note here a simple lemma, characterizing when connectivity is pre-
served under Y -to-∆operations.
Lemma 4.2.
(i) Let G be a 2-connected graph, and let {e, f, g} be the edges at a
vertex v of degree 3 in G.
If none of its edges are parallel (i.e., if v has three diﬀerent neighbors),
then the result of a Y -to-∆operation is again 2-connected.
(ii) Let G be a 3-connected graph (in particular, there are no parallel
edges; all vertex degrees are at least 3) that is not K4. Let {e, f, g}
be the edges at a vertex v in G of degree 3.
If we perform a Y -to-∆operation on this 3-star, and then delete all
parallel edges created by this (i.e., all edges that originally connected
neighbors of v), then the resulting graph is again 3-connected.
Proof. This follows directly from the deﬁnitions: for this consider a Y -to-∆
operation G −→G′. Then for any set of one or two separating vertices
in G′, the same set is separating in G as well. The only problem is that a
Y -to-∆operation can create parallel edges; if we delete them, the operation
preserves 3-connectedness.
The nice thing now is that, because of duality, we immediately get a dual
statement, Lemma 4.2∗, about connectivity after a ∆-to-Y transformation.
For this we use that under duality, we have
embedded planar graph G
←→
dual graph G∗,
contracting series edges
←→
deleting parallel edges,
k-connected
←→
k-connected,
nonseparating triangle
←→
3-star,
∆-to-Y transformation
←→
Y -to-∆transformation.
This duality can be carried into our reduction for polytopes, because the
graph of a 3-polytope is exactly the dual graph of the polar polytope:
G(P)∗= G(P ∆).
4.2
Simple ∆Y Transformations Preserve
Realizability
By a simple ∆Y reduction we mean any ∆Y operation followed immediately
by all the SP reductions that are then possible. By Lemma 4.2 and its dual,

108
4. Steinitz’ Theorem for 3-Polytopes
these reductions preserve 3-connectedness, if applied to any 3-connected
graph other than K4.
We get four diﬀerent types of simple ∆-to-Y reductions: for this we
consider a triangle and distinguish whether it has zero, one, two, or three
vertices of degree 3.
Here the dotted lines in our sketch denote edges that may or may not be
present, and are not aﬀected by the simple ∆-to-Y reduction.
Similarly, we get four types of simple Y -to-∆transformations when we
consider a vertex v of degree 3 and distinguish how many of its neighbors
are already connected:
These four transformations are exactly the “polar operations” (opera-
tions in the dual graph) for the simple ∆-to-Y reductions.
Lemma 4.3.
Let G be a 3-connected planar graph, and let the graph G′
be derived from G by a simple ∆Y transformation.
If G′ is the graph of a 3-polytope, then so is G.

4.3 Planar Graphs are ∆Y Reducible
109
Proof. By duality, respectively polarity, we have to treat only the four
types of ∆-to-Y transformations. For these, the transformation from P ′
to P just corresponds to “cutting oﬀa vertex” by some suitable plane.
(To visualize this, consider our sketch of the four types of simple ∆-to-Y
transformations, interpreting them as pictures of 3-polytopes.)
4.3
Planar Graphs are ∆Y Reducible
In this section we show that every 3-connected planar graph (with n ≥4
edges) can be reduced to K4 by a sequence of simple ∆Y transformations.
This is a special case of a much more powerful theorem (for 2-connected pla-
nar graphs plus a “return edge”) that was ﬁrst established by Epifanov [198]
and has a clever and simple proof by Truemper [546]. In this section, we
follow his expositions in [546] and [547, Sect. 4.3].
For a while, we will only require that the graphs considered are 2-
connected; in particular, we admit ∆Y operations if they keep our graphs
2-connected.
In the simplicity of Truemper’s approach to Epifanov’s theorem, the
reader should appreciate the “power of a normal form theorem” (in this
case: the embedding of a planar graph as a minor of a grid graph, which is
also at the heart of Robertson & Seymour’s work [464] on graph minors).
Here come three lemmas and a corollary, which together prove every-
thing. [Working through this, you can practice “three levels of reading”:
ﬁrst read only the lemmas, and try to understand what they mean and
how much is trivial. Second glance over the proofs, and try to see whether
you know how to do them yourself. If you know, just do it. If you don’t,
try to ﬁnd counterexamples. In the third step, work your way through the
proofs until you are conﬁdent that you found all the errors I made and the
shortcuts I missed. Tell me about them.]
