[문서 맥락]
책: Lectures on Polytopes / 저자: Günter M. Ziegler
챕터: 4. Steinitz' Theorem for 3-Polytopes
현재 소단원: 4.ex Problems and Exercises
직전 소단원: 「4.4 Extensions of Steinitz' Theorem」
[연습문제]
Problems and Exercises
119
We don’t try to do details here: They are “too non-linear for this book.”
However, a recent explicit variational principle for circle packing found by
Bobenko and Springborn [109] yields a very elegant proof for Theorem 4.13.
This is worked out in detail in [580]; for the uniqueness part see also Spring-
born [510].
Still a diﬀerent polytope realization algorithm, for simplicial 3-polytopes,
was given by Das & Goodrich [178]: it essentially works by doing “many
inverse Steinitz operations on independent vertices in one step,” and thus
yields a linear-time realization algorithm that produces realizations with a
singly-exponential bound on the size of the integer coordinates (as does the
Onn–Sturmfels algorithm [428] [459, Sect. 13.2] for general 3-polytopes).
Elementary semialgebraic sets are basic objects. Exercise 4.22 indicates
that they can have very complicated structure. General semialgebraic sets
(for which also nonstrict inequalities are admitted in the deﬁning system)
can be written as ﬁnite unions of elementary semialgebraic sets.
In this chapter we only met realization spaces that are quite trivial (con-
tractible); this will change as soon as we have developed the theory to
analyze the realization spaces of some high-dimensional polytopes, in Lec-
ture 6. The study of semialgebraic sets is called real algebraic geometry —
a very active and fascinating ﬁeld of research. We refer to Bochnak, Coste
& Roy [110] and Becker [65] for more information.
Problems and Exercises
4.0
Show that the complete graph K5, and the complete bipartite graphs
K3,n, are ∆Y -reducible. Considering the graphs that are ∆Y -equiv-
alent to K6, show that Kn is not ∆Y -reducible, for n ≥6, and that
Km,n is not ∆Y -reducible for m, n ≥4.
4.1
If G is a 3-connected graph with n ≥4 edges, show that it contains
a subdivision of K4.
4.2
Show that the deﬁnition of k-connectivity given in the notes to this
lecture specialize to our deﬁnitions in Section 4.1 of 2-connectivity
(for graphs with more than 1 edge) and of 3-connectivity (for graphs
with more than 3 edges).
4.3
What is the problem with the construction of P from P ′, if G −→G′
is a simple Y -to-∆transformation? For this, try to prove the Y -to-∆
part of Lemma 4.3.
If you are comfortable with projective transformations (Section 2.7),
explain how to do this without using polarity (as we did).
4.4
Check how to do the reduction theorem for grid graphs entirely within
the framework of 3-connected graphs. Where are the problems? How

120
4. Steinitz’ Theorem for 3-Polytopes
do you make grid graphs 3-connected? How many “basic operations”
do you need?
4.5
Characterize the graphs of centrally symmetric 3-polytopes.
(Gr¨unbaum [252, Thm. 13.2.5])
4.6
Let G be any ﬁnite graph drawn into the plane without crossings, and
let v be its number of vertices, e its number of edges, c its number
of connected components, and f the number of connected regions
determined by it. For example, the graph
has v = 10, e = 11, f = 5, and c = 3.
Show that in general v −e + f = 1 + c. Deduce Euler’s formula
v −e + f
=
2
for the number of vertices v, the number of edges e, and the number
of facets f of a 3-polytope.
4.7
Deduce from Steinitz’ theorem (from Corollary 4.9) that every planar
graph has a straight line drawing in the plane without intersections.
(In graph theory literature, this appears as a result of Wagner [554],
rediscovered by F´ary [205]. It is also quite easy to prove this directly
by induction on the number of vertices; see, for example, Hartsﬁeld
& Ringel [273, p. 167].)
4.8
Conclude from Exercise 4.6 that for every 3-polytope P, either the
polytope P itself or its polar P ∆has a facet that is a simplex.
(This is not true for 4-polytopes — for these read about the regular
24-cell, whose facets are octahedra and whose vertex ﬁgures are cubes;
see, for example, Coxeter [164, Sect. 8.2].)
4.9
The graph of the 3-cube, G(C3), has cycles that go through all the
vertices (“Hamiltonian cycles”).

Problems and Exercises
121
Take such a cycle, and then construct a realization of a combinatorial
cube in 3-space such that the usual projection π : R3 −→R2 carries
the cube to an 8-gon, and the cycle to the boundary cycle of the
8-gon. Then do the same for the 3-dimensional permutahedron Π3,
and for the (regular) dodecahedron.
4.10
Show that we cannot prescribe the shape of two facets of a 3-polytope
(even if they have congruent intersection). In fact, in a triangular
prism
c
b
a
if one square face is prescribed such that the edges a and b are parallel,
then the other square faces have to have b and c respectively a and c
parallel.
4.11
One cannot prescribe two disjoint facets of a 3-polytope either. For
this, analyze the prism over an n-gon, and show the following. If
we prescribe the bottom n-gon, then the coordinatizations of the
completed prism are prescribed by n + 3 linear parameters (“degrees
of freedom”), while we have 2n −3 choices for the shape of the top
facet. Thus, if we prescribe two generic n-gons, then they cannot be
built into a prism, if n ≥7.

122
4. Steinitz’ Theorem for 3-Polytopes
4.12
Show that we cannot prescribe the shape of the shadow boundary of
a 3-polytope.
(J¨urgen Richter-Gebert, who noted that from a triangular prism, you
can get a hexagon as a projection, but the shape of the hexagon can-
not be prescribed: see page 141! Earlier, Barnette [46] gave a proof for
the case where the 3-polytope is a tetrahedron with a stellar subdi-
vision on every facet, and Q is a regular 8-gon. Also, you can use the
prisms of the previous exercise, and again count degrees of freedom.)
4.13
Show that not all 3-polytopes can be represented in such a way that
all facets touch the unit sphere, or that all vertices are on the unit
sphere. Which 3-polytopes can be represented this way?
(Remark: This is a classical problem that goes back to 1832; see
Steiner [523], Steinitz [525], and Schulte [486]. The characterization
problem was solved very recently by Hodgson, Rivin & Smith [277].)
4.14
Show that if an n-gon is represented in R2 in such a way that all of
its edges touch S1 in their midpoints, then the n-gon is regular.
If the edges just touch S1, but not necessarily with their midpoints,
then the n-gon need not be regular, even if we require that the sum
of the vectors of the contact points is 0.
4.15
Let f2(n) ∈N be the smallest number such that the convex n-gon
P2(n) can be represented on an f2(n) × f2(n) grid, that is, with all
vertices in {0, 1, . . . , f2(n)}2. For example, we have f2(3) = f2(4) = 1,
f2(5) = f2(6) = 2, f2(7) = f2(8) = 3, f2(9) = 4, but f(10) = 5 (see
the ﬁgure).
(i) Show that f2(n) ≤c n3/2 for some c > 0.
(In fact, Thiele [539, Satz 4.1.10] proved that the bound
f2(n)
=
2π
 n
12
3/2
+ O(n log n)
is sharp.)
(ii) Using part (i), show that the cyclic 3-polytope C3(n) with n
vertices can be represented on a k × k × 3 grid, where k =
f2(n −1).

Problems and Exercises
123
(iii) Using part (i), show that the polar cyclic 3-polytope C3(m)∆
with n vertices (where n = 2m −4) can be represented on a
k′ × k′ × k′ grid, where k′ = f2( n
2 + 1).
4.16* For n ≥4 let f3(n) be the smallest positive integer such that every
3-dimensional polytope with n vertices can be represented with inte-
gral vertices in {0, 1, . . . , f3(n)}3. Let f s
3(n) be the same function for
simplicial 3-polytopes.
Determine the asymptotic behavior of the functions f3(n) and f s
3(n).
(Work by Goodman, Pollack & Sturmfels [238, Sect. 5] shows that
for d-dimensional simplicial polytopes with d + 4 vertices one needs
vertex coordinates that grow doubly exponentially in d,
f s
d(d + 4)
≥
22cd
for some constant c > 0. However, there is no such result that applies
to simplicial polytopes for any constant dimension d.
The case d = 3 might be special: it is quite possible that there is a
quadratic upper bound on f3(n); up to now only exponential upper
bounds f s
3(n) ≤28.45n and f3(n) ≤533n2 are known, due to Onn &
Sturmfels [428], Richter-Gebert [459, p. 143], and ﬁnally Rib´o Mor &
Rote [454, Chap. 6].
4.17* For n ≥4, let g(n) ∈N be the smallest number such that every
3-connected planar graph with n vertices can be represented in the
plane in such a way that the vertices are on the g(n) × g(n) grid,
the edges are straight, and the bounded regions determined by the
graph embedding, as well as the union of all these regions, are strictly
convex (i.e., all interior angles are smaller than π). How large is g(n)?
(If one just requires straight-line embeddings, without the convexity
assumptions, then one can embed the graph on a (2n−4)×(n−2) grid;
see de Fraysseix, Pach & Pollack [209], and even on an (n−1)×(n−1)
grid, by Schnyder [479]. Chrobak & Kant [157] [311, Section 10.2.2]
have is a convex (but not strictly convex) drawing algorithm that runs
in linear time and only needs a grid on (n−1)×(n−1) vertices! Note
that the superlinear lower bounds of Problem 4.15 apply here. With
the strict convexity assumption, the currently best upper bound is
O(n3) × O(n3), due to Chrobak, Goodrich & Tomassia [156].)
4.18* Does every 3-polytope have a realization with rational edge-lengths?
4.19* Can every (simple) convex 3-polytope P be represented in such a way
that a combinatorially polar polytope Q ∼= P ∆can be constructed
as the convex hull of vertices that are chosen on the corresponding
facets of P?

124
4. Steinitz’ Theorem for 3-Polytopes
Can you do this for the 3-polytope obtained by cutting oﬀthe vertices
of a tetrahedron?
That is, can you represent this polytope in such a way, with points on
its facets, that adjacent facets of P correspond to adjacent vertices
on the convex hull P of the points?
(For the special polytope P above J¨urgen Richter-Gebert saw in 1993
that this can be done. In 2004, Andreas Paﬀenholz has constructed
a POLYMAKE model for it.
The general problem is suggested by the misleading description of
polar polytopes in the book by Bartels [55, p. 74]. Gr¨unbaum &
Shephard posed the question as Problem 3 in [259]. Gr¨unbaum sent
me the following e-mail message:
As far as I know, the problem is still open. I am inclined
to believe that the answer is negative, and that once some
counterexamples are found, we will all be saying how obvious
that is.
I agree.)
4.20
Which subsets of R are elementary semialgebraic?
4.21
Show that for every convex d-polytope with n-vertices, the realiza-
tion space is an elementary semialgebraic set in Rd×n.
(For this, embed the polytope into Rd+1, consider the maximal deter-
minants of a realization matrix, and note that the condition that d+1
points have to be on a common facet says that a certain subdetermi-
nant is 0. Similarly, two points being on the same side of the facet
spanned by some basis means that the product of two determinants
is positive.)
4.22
Let S ⊆Rd be a polyhedral set: a ﬁnite union of convex polytopes.
Show that there is an open semialgebraic set M ⊆Rd that is a
neighborhood for S, such that S is a deformation retract of M.
(Hint: First show that the relative interior, and the exterior, of any
ball is an open elementary semialgebraic set. Also the intersection of
two elementary semialgebraic sets is elementary semialgebraic. Thus

Problems and Exercises
125
M can be constructed, for example, by deleting a ﬁnite number of
small closed balls from a larger open ball.
In the drawing, S is a union of a line segment and the boundary of a
triangle; the set M appears shaded.)
4.23
The following problems discuss diﬀerent ways in which a planar graph
can be represented by objects in the plane.
(i)
Prove that the vertices of a planar bipartite graph can be rep-
resented by horizontal and vertical closed line segments in the
plane, such that the segments intersect if and only if the corre-
sponding vertices are adjacent.
(Hartman, Newman & Ziv [272])
(ii)
In fact, every planar bipartite graph can be represented by dis-
joint horizontal and vertical open line segments in the plane,
which touch if and only if the corresponding vertices are adja-
cent.
(de Fraysseix, Ossona de Mendez & Pach [429, Sect. 6.3] [208])
(iii)* Can every planar graph be represented by a family of line seg-
ments in the plane such that every vertex corresponds to a seg-
ment and adjacent vertices correspond to intersecting edges?
4.24
Describe a “fast” algorithm to test whether two 3-polytopes are com-
binatorially equivalent.
For this, assume that the combinatorial structure is given by the
vertex-facet incidence matrices of the polytopes; from these, construct
the graphs. Then use that graph isomorphism can be tested “in linear
time” for planar graphs, according to Hopcroft & Wong [283].

126
4. Steinitz’ Theorem for 3-Polytopes
(As a theoretical concept of fast algorithms one has the theory of poly-
nomial algorithms and NP-completeness; see Garey & Johnson [223].
The question of whether a polynomial algorithm exists for isomor-
phism of general graphs is one of the prominent open problems in
this theory [223, pp. 155–158].)
4.25* A simple planar representation of a 3-polytope is obtained if we
“cut it open” along a spanning tree in its graph, lay out the result-
ing structure in the plane. Thus we obtain nets of 3-polytopes. The
following sketches show nets for a symmetric square pyramid, for a
not-so-symmetric square pyramid, and for a symmetric cube.
Not every way to open a 3-polytope leads to a valid net without
overlaps. For example, the following drawing shows a “bad” way to
unfold a 3-polytope that is combinatorially equivalent to the 3-cube.
Can every 3-polytope be represented by a planar net without over-
laps?
(This problem appears in Shephard [496], see also [168, Problem B21].
Nets of 3-polytopes were studied extensively in Alexandrow [11].
Combinatorially diﬀerent 3-polytopes may have the same net — thus
we cannot really “represent” 3-polytopes by nets; an example for this
was given by Shephard [496]. Another surprising fact in this connec-
tion can be found in Namiki, Matsui & Fukuda [420]: even tetrahedra
may have overlapping nets!)
4.26* Characterize the graphs of 4-dimensional polytopes.

5
Schlegel Diagrams for 4-Polytopes
Now that we understand the combinatorics of 3-polytopes (do we?), the
next step is to investigate 4-polytopes. Those are harder to understand,
since we (i.e., most of us) lack a genuine geometric intuition for the geome-
try of 4-dimensional Euclidean space. Nevertheless, there are various tools
available. The most prominent one is the “Schlegel diagram” of a polytope,
a polytopal complex that represents most of the geometry of a 4-polytope.
We will discuss polytopal complexes in some detail (they will be needed for
other purposes as well), and then we get to discuss Schlegel diagrams, and
some of the traps involved.
5.1
Polyhedral Complexes
Deﬁnition 5.1.
A polyhedral complex C is a ﬁnite collection of polyhedra
in Rd such that
(i) the empty polyhedron is in C,
(ii) if P ∈C, then all the faces of P are also in C,
(iii) the intersection P ∩Q of two polyhedra P, Q ∈C is a face both of P
and of Q.
The dimension dim(C) is the largest dimension of a polyhedron in C. The
underlying set of C is the point set |C| := S
P ∈C P.
C is a polytopal complex if all the polyhedra in C are bounded (polytopes).
 G.M. Ziegler, Lectures on Polytopes, Graduate Texts in Mathematics 152,   
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4613-8431-1_6, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2007 
 
127
