[문서 맥락]
책: Lectures on Polytopes / 저자: Günter M. Ziegler
챕터: 6. Duality, Gale Diagrams, and Applications
현재 소단원: 6.5.d Polytopes Violating the Isotopy Conjecture
직전 소단원: 「6.5.c 2-Faces of 5-Polytopes Cannot be Prescribed」
[본문]
6.5 Polytopes with Few Vertices
177
An explicit geometric description of the polytope P = Q∆is given in
Exercise 6.27.
(d) Polytopes Violating the Isotopy Conjecture
Recall from Section 4.4 that the “realization space” of a polytope is an
elementary semialgebraic set, and that elementary semialgebraic sets can
be arbitrarily complicated spaces: they can be disconnected, with holes,
and so forth (Exercise 4.22).
However, Steinitz’ Theorem 4.11 states that for every 3-dimensional poly-
tope the realization space R(P) is contractible, and thus connected. (To
get this right, we had to ﬁx an aﬃne basis in our Deﬁnition 4.10 of real-
ization spaces, to make sure that the “reﬂection” doesn’t create a second
component of the realization space.)
In other words, any two 3-polytopes of the same combinatorial type and
orientation can always be continuously deformed into each other, such that
each intermediate object is a 3-polytope of the same combinatorial type.
The same is not hard to show for d-polytopes with at most d + 3 vertices,
using Gale diagrams.
However, this “isotopy property” fails even for 4-polytopes: Kleinschmidt
constructed a 4-dimensional example with 10 vertices [114]; its combina-
torial type is obtained by glueing two copies of the 8-vertex Kleinschmidt
polytope of Exercise 6.18 in their octahedron facets in an “incompatible
way.” See Mn¨ev [408, p. 530] and Bokowski & Guedes de Oliveira [115].
A systematic construction method for 4-dimensional counterexamples is
provided by Richter-Gebert’s Universality Theorem for 4-polytopes [459].
Here we start a construction with a planar point conﬁguration, where the
isotopy conjecture [463] [234] fails — and transfer this result to polytopes.
Example 6.24 (A nonisotopic 24-polytope with 28 vertices).
The “isotopy property” fails for d-polytopes with d+4 vertices: for that, we
can start from a planar point conﬁguration that does not satisfy isotopy.
The smallest nonisotopic planar point conﬁgurations that are currently
known have 14 points. The ﬁrst such conﬁguration was found by Suvorov
[537] [96, p. 363]. Here we present the nicest and newest one, found by
Richter-Gebert [458].
For this we refer to the ﬁgure on the next page: it represents Richter-
Gebert’s example, with two points drawn “at inﬁnity” (which we interpret
as “very far away,” to get an aﬃne conﬁguration).
The key property of the ﬁgure can be seen as follows. Try to construct a
new conﬁguration of 14 points in the (projective) plane, with the condition
that point sets that are collinear in the old ﬁgure also have to be collinear in
the new ﬁgure. After a projective transformation, we may assume that the
points 1, 2, 3, and 4 (a “projective basis”) are positioned as in the old ﬁgure.

178
6. Duality, Gale Diagrams, and Applications
Then we choose the point 5 on the diagonal through 3 and 4. Thus we have
ﬁve points which then successively determine the points 6, 7, . . . , 13. The
fourteenth point 14 is then placed at the intersection of the lines 1, 3 and
2, 4, but not on the line 12, 13: this is possible if the point 5 had been drawn
slightly Southeast of the center, as in our ﬁgure, or if it is taken slightly
Northwest of the center, which results in a ﬁgure that is a reﬂection of our
ﬁgure; however, it is impossible (it results in a diﬀerent conﬁguration, with
12, 13, 14 collinear) to get a realization of the same conﬁguration which is
itself symmetric with respect to the x = y diagonal: for that we’d have to
choose 5 in the center, and would get 12, 13 and 14 collinear.
→1
2
↑
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
A conﬁguration with this eﬀect is not too hard to construct, but this
example has a stronger property: If the point 5 is chosen close enough
to the midpoint of the segment [3, 4], then the “Southeast” and “North-
west” realizations not only have the same collinearities (and thus the same
unsigned cocircuits, the same matroid), but they have the same signed co-
circuits — both realizations yield the same oriented matroid. We do not
know whether one really needs 14 points for this eﬀect: can you do with
less (Problem 6.26*)?
From this, one can easily construct an aﬃne planar Gale diagram that
has a disconnected realization space. However, we must also make sure
that every polytope that is (only!) combinatorially equivalent to the one we
construct has the same diagram. A very “aggressive” method is to replace
every point of the diagram by a pair of positive and negative points: this
yields the aﬃne Gale diagram of a 24-polytope with only 28 vertices that
has two isotopy classes of realizations. Implicitly, this is what the “Lawrence
construction” does, which we will discuss below.

6.6 Rigidity and Universality
179
Another nonisotopic point conﬁguration, of 21 points, is explicitly con-
structed in White [559]. A general construction method is due to Mn¨ev [408].
In particular, Mn¨ev’s universality theorem (see below) shows that the “real-
ization space” for planar point conﬁguration can be arbitrarily complicated.
Suvorov [537] and Jaggi et al. [290] furthermore construct non-isotopic
conﬁgurations whose points are in general position. From these, one can —
using a technique of Sturmfels [117, Thm. 6.5] — get simplicial polytopes
that violate the isotopy conjecture. This yields examples for a much more
general “universality theorem for polytopes,” described in the next section.
6.6
Rigidity and Universality
We have characterized Gale diagrams of polytopes in Corollary 6.20. To
make statements about polytopes of a ﬁxed combinatorial type, however,
it is not suﬃcient to look at a speciﬁc Gale diagram: we have to make
sure that the statement we make holds for all polytopes combinatorially
equivalent to the given polytope.
Here we have to deal with two diﬀerent notions of equivalence. We have
noted that two polytopes may be combinatorially equivalent but have dif-
ferent oriented matroids. (See, for example, the octahedra of Example 6.3.)
However, any two polytopes with the same oriented matroid are combina-
torially equivalent: they have the same covectors, hence the same positive
covectors, and hence the same cofaces, and thus the same faces.
To make Gale diagrams useful for high-dimensional polytopes, we have
to get a hold on all Gale diagrams representing a combinatorial equivalence
class of polytopes. This is not simple, and it would lead into a discussion of
“partial oriented matroids” that we want to avoid (there is not much theory
for that, either). Instead, we restrict ourselves to an important special case:
when only one oriented matroid is possible for a given convex polytope.
Deﬁnition 6.25.
The oriented matroid of a d-polytope P ⊆Rd is rigid
if every polytope P ′ that is combinatorially equivalent to P has the same
oriented matroid.
Here our convention is to identify the vertex sets of P and of P ′ with [n]
in a way that is compatible with the combinatorial equivalence. With this,
combinatorial equivalence means that the oriented matroids M(P) and
M(P ′) have the same set of positive cocircuits, and rigidity means that
this implies that all cocircuits of P and of P ′ coincide:
C∗(P) ∩{+, 0}n = C∗(P ′) ∩{+, 0}n
=⇒
C∗(P) = C∗(P ′).
For example, triangular prisms are rigid, but octahedra are not. The con-
cept of rigidity is only interesting because there are some rigid polytopes
around, although “most” polytopes are not rigid. Here is one construction
to get rigid polytopes.
