[문서 맥락]
책: Lectures on Polytopes / 저자: Günter M. Ziegler
챕터: 8. Shellability and the Upper Bound Theorem
현재 소단원: 8.1 Shellable and Nonshellable Complexes
직전 소단원: 「7.ex Problems and Exercises」
[본문]
8
Shellability and
the Upper Bound Theorem
Perhaps the most famous result about convex polytopes is the Euler-
Poincar´e formula:
−f−1 + f0 −f1 + f2 + · · · + (−1)d−1fd−1 + (−1)dfd = 0,
where fi denotes the number of i-dimensional faces of a d-polytope P. Here
f−1 = 1 and fd = 1 correspond to the trivial faces (the empty face and
the polytope itself), and f0, f1, fd−2, and fd−1 are the numbers of vertices,
edges, ridges, and facets, respectively. So for 2-polytopes we obtain that
f0 −f1 = 0, the number of vertices equals the number of edges (not much
of a surprise). For 3-polytopes we get “Euler’s formula”
v −e + f = 2
for a 3-polytope with v = f0 vertices, e = f1 edges, and f = f2 facets.
For d ≤3 the Euler-Poincar´e formula is easy to prove, but for higher
dimensions care is needed. As Gr¨unbaum [252] observed, all the classical
inductive proofs (starting with Schl¨aﬂi’s [473] proof from 1852; see also
Sommerville [506, p. 147], Schoute [480, p. 61], and the references in [252,
p. 141]) assume that the boundary of every polytope can be built up induc-
tively in a nice way, that is, it can be “shelled.” That this is in fact possible
was only proved by Bruggesser & Mani in 1970. A striking application of
shellability was McMullen’s proof of the “upper bound theorem” in the
same year, 1970.
In this lecture we have several big goals. We start with shellability for
polyhedral complexes, a concept that is both useful and nontrivial. We will
show that
 G.M. Ziegler, Lectures on Polytopes, Graduate Texts in Mathematics 152,   
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4613-8431-1_9, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2007 
 
231

232
8. Shellability and the Upper Bound Theorem
• polytopes are shellable,
• subdivisions of polytopes are not shellable in general, and
• while shelling polytopes, one can get stuck (that’s a new result).
Then, we’ll present McMullen’s proof for the upper bound theorem, give
a glimpse of extremal set theory, and end with the famous g-theorem, and
derive some of its surprising consequences. So, there’s a lot to do: let’s get
going.
. . . wait, here is one more remark. This lecture has a distinctive “topo-
logical” ﬂavor. In fact, already the ﬁrst correct and complete proof of the
Euler-Poincar´e formula, by Poincar´e [444, 445], was done using tools of al-
gebraic topology that Poincar´e had developed himself. Here we will avoid
most topological subtleties, for example by restricting our attention to poly-
hedral subdivisions of polytopes and their boundaries, instead of subdivided
topological balls and spheres. Thus, for this lecture no knowledge is needed
of the wonderful subtleties of piecewise linear topology, nor of the powerful
machinery of algebraic topology. Nevertheless, it is helpful and desirable,
and good for your intuition, if you take, at least, an excursion into these
worlds. I recommend Stillwell [528], Munkres [418], Daverman [179], and
Bj¨orner [89] as guides to diﬀerent points of view.
8.1
Shellable and Nonshellable Complexes
A polytopal complex (see Deﬁnition 5.1) is a ﬁnite, nonempty collection C
of polytopes (called the faces of C) in Rd that contains all the faces of its
polytopes, and such that the intersection of two of its polytopes is a face
of each of them.
The dimension dim(C) of a polytopal complex is the largest dimension of
a polytope in C. A polytopal complex is pure if each of its faces is contained
in a face of dimension dim(C), that is, if all the inclusion-maximal faces of C,
called the facets of C, have the same dimension. A complex is simplicial if
all its faces (equivalently, all its facets) are simplices. The underlying set
of C is the union of its faces, |C| := S
F ∈C F.
For example, a graph represents a polytopal complex if it is drawn in the
plane or in R3 with straight lines that do not cross. It has dimension 1 if
the graph has at least one edge, and then it is pure if the graph does not
have an isolated vertex.
In Lecture 5 we met ﬁve important classes of polytopal complexes:
(i) Every polytope P together with all its faces forms the polytopal com-
plex C(P). The only maximal face (“facet”) of this complex is P itself.
(ii) All the proper faces of P form the boundary complex C(∂P), whose
facets are just the facets of P. This is a pure polytopal complex of
dimension dim(P) −1. This complex is simplicial if and only if the
polytope is simplicial.

8.1 Shellable and Nonshellable Complexes
233
(iii) Any Schlegel diagram of P with respect to a facet F (remember
Lecture 5?) forms a pure polytopal complex D(P, F), and the facets
of this complex correspond to the facets of P that are diﬀerent from F.
(iv) Every d-diagram D is a polytopal complex.
(v) The pile of cubes Pd(z1, . . . , zd), as deﬁned in Example 5.4, is a pure
polytopal complex, with z1·z2· . . . ·zd facets.
All of these complexes are pure. In the following picture gallery, the ﬁrst
complex is pure 1-dimensional (a graph), the second one is not pure, and
the third one is pure 2-dimensional.
We now proceed to deﬁne shellability, in a version that is slightly more
restrictive than the original one used by Bruggesser & Mani [139]. Several
variations are discussed in Danaraj & Klee [171]. It turned out in the work
of Bj¨orner & Wachs [98] [85] [96, Sect. 4.7] that the following one is the
one that “works” in very general geometric and combinatorial contexts.
Deﬁnition 8.1.
Let C be a pure k-dimensional polytopal complex. A
shelling of C is a linear ordering F1, F2, . . . , Fs of the facets of C such that
either C is 0-dimensional (and thus the facets are points), or it satisﬁes the
following conditions:
(i) The boundary complex C(∂F1) of the ﬁrst facet F1 has a shelling.
(ii) For 1 < j ≤s the intersection of the facet Fj with the union of the
previous facets is nonempty and is a beginning segment of a shelling
of the (k −1)-dimensional boundary complex of Fj, that is,
Fj ∩(
j−1
[
i=1
Fi)
=
G1 ∪G2 ∪· · · ∪Gr
for some shelling G1, G2, . . . , Gr, . . . , Gt of C(∂Fj), and 1 ≤r ≤t.
(In particular, this requires that Fj ∩(Sj−1
i=1 Fi) has a shelling, so it
has to be pure (k−1)-dimensional, and connected for k > 1.)
A polytopal complex is shellable if it is pure and has a shelling.
Thus shellability is not deﬁned for complexes that are not pure, although
it turned out in recent work by Bj¨orner & Wachs [99] that an extension of
the concept to nonpure complexes is possible and useful.

234
8. Shellability and the Upper Bound Theorem
Examples 8.2.
(i) Every 0-dimensional complex is shellable, by deﬁnition. A 1-dimen-
sional complex (a graph) is shellable if and only if it is connected. In
particular, this means that it is pure (i.e., has no isolated vertices). A
shelling order is an ordering of the edges e1, e2, . . . , es in such a way
that the set {e1, . . . , ej} describes a connected subgraph for every j:
this comes from the condition that the intersection of the edge ej
with the earlier edges has to be 0-dimensional, and thus nonempty.
(ii) The following are three 2-complexes in the plane R2.
2
3
5
1
1
2
3
4
5
4
1
2
The ﬁrst two are not shellable, but the third one is. (Check this!) In
each of them, there is a beginning of a shelling indicated, that is, the
complex given by the numbered facets together with their faces is
shellable. However, if you try to add the last facet in any of the ﬁrst
two examples, you violate condition (ii) of Deﬁnition 8.1.
(iii) Every simplex is shellable, and every ordering of its facets is a shelling
order. This immediately follows by induction on the dimension, since
the intersection of Fj with Fi (i < j) is always a facet of Fj in this
case.
(iv) The d-cubes are shellable: by induction on dimension one can show
that every ordering of the 2d facets F1, F2, . . . , F2d such that the
ﬁrst and the last facet are opposite, F1 = −F2d, is a shelling or-
der. (The condition F1 = −F2d is suﬃcient, but not necessary, see
Exercise 8.1(i)!)
(v) The pile of cubes Pd(a1, . . . , ad), see Example 5.4, is shellable for
arbitrary ﬁnite ai ≥1. For this, we use part (iv) to see that the
lexicographic order on the little cubes in the pile is a shelling order.
Remarks 8.3.
(i)
We will see in the next section that condition 8.1(i) is in fact redun-
dant: the boundary complex C(∂F1) of every polytope is shellable.
However, if one deﬁnes shellability more generally for cell complexes
rather than polytopes, as in Bj¨orner [85], then this is necessary.
(ii)
For simplicial complexes condition 8.1(i) is redundant because of Ex-
ample 8.2(iii). In this situation, condition 8.1(ii) can also be simpliﬁed
considerably: it can be replaced by

8.1 Shellable and Nonshellable Complexes
235
8.1(ii′) For 1 < j ≤s the intersection of the facet Fj with the previ-
ous facets is nonempty and pure (k −1)-dimensional.
In other words, for every i < j there exists some l < j such that
the intersection Fi ∩Fj is contained in Fl ∩Fj, and such that
Fl ∩Fj is a facet of Fj.
(iii)
One might be tempted to weaken condition 8.1(ii), and only require
the following:
8.1(ii′′) For 1 < j ≤s the intersection of the facet Fj with the
previous facets
Fj ∩(
j−1
[
i=1
Fi) = G1 ∪. . . ∪Gr
is nonempty, pure (k −1)-dimensional, and shellable.
This can be done. It yields the original deﬁnition by Bruggesser &
Mani [139], which is weaker than Deﬁnition 8.2. Although the main
conclusions of shellability one wants remain valid, this weaker version
does not have the nice combinatorial characterization that is possible
for the stronger version [98].
We continue, with more examples.
Examples 8.4.
(i) Every polytopal subdivision of a 2-polytope is shellable — see Exer-
cise 8.0.
(ii) The boundary of every 3-polytope is shellable. This follows from (i):
for this we ﬁrst shell a Schlegel diagram D(P, F) of P, which is a sub-
division of a 2-polytope. This corresponds to a shelling of the whole
boundary ∂P except for the facet F. The shelling can be completed
by taking F as its last facet.
Subdivisions of 2-polytopes and boundaries of 3-polytopes are easy to
shell. One reason is that no matter how we start the shelling, we can’t get
stuck. Let’s introduce some fancy terminology for this.
Deﬁnition 8.5.
(Danaraj & Klee [172, p. 37])
A polyhedral complex is extendably shellable if every partial shelling can be
continued, that is, if for every shellable subcomplex of the same dimension
there is a shelling of the whole complex that shells the subcomplex ﬁrst.
In this sense, we see from Examples 8.4 that subdivisions of 2-polytopes
as well as the boundaries of 3-polytopes are extendably shellable. Similarly,
one can show that the d-cubes are extendably shellable (Exercise 8.1(i)).

236
8. Shellability and the Upper Bound Theorem
Lemma 8.6.
The pile of cubes P3(9, 9, 4) is not extendably shellable.
Proof. For this, consider the picture below. It depicts a subcomplex of
the pile, broken into layers (so you can see what happens inside). The
subcomplex is easily seen to be shellable (for example, ﬁrst shell the bottom
layer, then the next layer and the walls, then add the central axis, then the
top layer of the interior part, then the six remaining cubes).
A diﬀerent way to draw this type of complex (more abstractly) shows
the four layers, top to bottom, from left to right.
If we try to add any new cube of the pile P3(9, 9, 4) to the subcomplex,
then the intersection with what is already there is not pure 2-dimensional,
or not connected, or both. Thus, this is a shellable part of P3(9, 9, 4), and
we are stuck: so P3(9, 9, 4) is not extendably shellable.

8.1 Shellable and Nonshellable Complexes
237
For a polyhedral complex C, deﬁne the star star(v, C) of the vertex v to
be the polytopal subcomplex of all faces that contain v, and their faces.
Let the link be the subcomplex link(v, C) of all faces G ∈star(v, C) of the
star that do not have v as a vertex.
link(v, C)
star(v, C)
v
If C is pure of dimension d, then so is star(v, C), and link(v, C) is then pure
of dimension d−1.
The following lemma is a quite trivial, but important, piece of infor-
mation about the “local structure” of shellable simplicial complexes. For
nonsimplicial complexes, it becomes nontrivial (if it is true: Problem 8.4*).
Lemma 8.7.
Let C be a shellable simplicial complex, with shelling or-
der F1, F2, . . . , Fs. Then the restriction of this order to star(v, C) yields a
shelling order for the star, and also for link(v, C).
Proof. We directly verify condition 8.1(ii′): let Fj be a facet in the star
(so v ∈Fj), and let Fi be an earlier facet that also lies in the star (with
i < j and v ∈Fi). Since we have a shelling of C, there is a facet Fl with
l < j such that Fi ∩Fj ⊆Fl ∩Fj. But this implies that v ∈Fl, so Fl is in
the star of v.
The same proof also shows that we get a shelling of the link, since (in
the simplicial case) we have a bijection between k-faces G ∈link(v, C) and
(k+1)-faces bG = conv(G ∪v) ∈star(v, C).
Theorem 8.8.
(Rudin [468])
The 3-simplex ∆3 can be triangulated in a nonshellable way.
The ﬁrst nonshellable triangulation of a tetrahedron (with 14 vertices,
41 facets, all vertices on the boundary) was constructed by Rudin [468]
in 1958. Her construction is subtle and hard to visualize, and it seems to
be the only one in the literature. So, instead of reproducing it, here is a
diﬀerent construction that shows that the tetrahedron and the 3-cube have
nonshellable triangulations.
Example 8.9 (The Danzer cube).
Let C3 be our standard cube in R3,
and let V 12 be the set of 12 midpoints of the edges of C3, that is, the set
of all points in R3 with one coordinate 0 and the others equal to ±1. The
twelve points lie on the boundary of the cube C3, but also on the boundary

238
8. Shellability and the Upper Bound Theorem
of the tetrahedron
T3
:=







x ∈R3 :
+x + y + z ≤2
+x −y −z ≤2
−x + y −z ≤2
−x −y + z ≤2







=
conv





−2
−2
−2

,


−2
+2
+2

,


+2
−2
+2

,


+2
+2
−2




.
Next we construct a set E12 of 12 edges between the points in V 12. For
this, take one edge that connects the midpoints of two skew edges of the
cube, as well as all the images of that edge under the 12 symmetries of the
cube which correspond to orientation-preserving symmetries of the tetra-
hedron T3.
It turns out that the 12 edges we get (see the drawing) are grouped into
four disjoint triangles. The key property is that every edge is surrounded
by a triangle. By symmetry, it is in fact suﬃcient to verify this for one
single edge e ∈E12.
The next step is to construct a triangulation of the cube C3, respectively
of the tetrahedron T3, which contains the edges in E12 as faces (not sub-
divided!). While this can be done explicitly, here we resort to a powerful
tool: Whitehead’s completion lemma [560, Thm. 5], according to which ev-
ery partial triangulation of R3 can be completed. (In fact, the same is true
in Rd, according to Bing [80, Lemma 6]. See Bing [82, Sect. I.2] for a text-
book version.) Hence, we can take any triangulation of the boundary of C3,
respectively T3, that uses the vertices in V 12, plus the twelve edges in E12,
and complete this simplicial complex to a triangulation of C3, respectively
T3. There will be additional interior vertices necessary for this.

8.2 Shelling Polytopes
239
Now assume that the resulting simplicial complex C is shellable. We start
with one tetrahedron F1, and then add new ones, F2, F3, . . .. At every step,
except possibly the ﬁrst, not more than one new edge from the set E12 can
be added, since the edges in one of the triangles cannot be in a common
simplex, and if two skew edges were new, then this would contradict a
characteristic property of shellings of simplicial complexes: there has to be
a unique minimal new face at each step, which is nonempty after the ﬁrst
step (see Exercise 8.2).
Now let Fj+1 be the tetrahedron by which the last edge e from E12 is
added. At this point of the shelling the complex Cj := C(F1, . . . , Fj) already
contains the three edges e1, e2, e3 that surround e. In fact, the circle formed
in Cj by C := e1 ∪e2 ∪e3 can be contracted within the complex Cj: this is
a property of shellable complexes of dimension at least 2, which is easy to
verify by induction (they are “simply connected”).
v
e
Since the circle C surrounds the edge e, we have to “pass over” a vertex
v ⊆e when we contract C in Cj. Also, the link of this vertex v in the
complex Cj, link(v, Cj), is a 2-dimensional shellable complex, by Lemma 8.7.
However, we can contract our circle C within |Cj| until it lies in link(v, Cj),
but it cannot be contracted within the link, because then it would not pass
over v. This shows that the link is not shellable: contradiction.
8.2
Shelling Polytopes
The complex of a polytope C(P) is shellable if and only if the boundary
complex C(∂P) is shellable. Thus, “shelling a polytope” means ﬁnding a
shelling order for the facets of P. How do we do this? Is there an obvious
