[문서 맥락]
책: Lectures on Polytopes / 저자: Günter M. Ziegler
챕터: 8. Shellability and the Upper Bound Theorem
현재 소단원: 8.ex Problems and Exercises (분할 part 2)
직전 소단원: 「8.6 The g-Theorem and Its Consequences」
[연습문제]
9
Fiber Polytopes, and Beyond
The secondary polytopes of Gel’fand, Kapranov & Zelevinsky [231] are a
quite recent development that grew out of their theory of “A-hypergeo-
metric functions.” After Izrail M. Gel’fand and Andrei Zelevinsky presented
the miraculous construction at the 1989 Symposium on Combinatorics and
Geometry in Stockholm, a lot of eﬀort was put into understanding what is
going on geometrically. It seems that the deﬁnitive answer — unexpectedly
simple — is the one supplied by Louis Billera and Bernd Sturmfels [78,
79, 534], who introduced the ﬁber polytope of a projection of polytopes and
showed that secondary polytopes arise in the special case where we project
the (n −1)-simplex to a given polytope with n vertices.
The main goal in this lecture is to develop geometric intuition for the ﬁber
polytope construction. Many interesting examples have been studied, and
among them we will concentrate on the construction of the permutahedron
and the associahedron as ﬁber polytopes. With “ﬁber polytopes intuition”
we then construct the permuto-associahedra: nice new polytopes proposed
by Kapranov [313] as combinatorial objects and realized as polytopes in
Reiner & Ziegler [453].
So ﬁber polytopes help to solve special cases of a diﬃcult general prob-
lem: the construction of polytopes with speciﬁed combinatorics. Using the
Lawrence construction (Lecture 6), one can see that the solution for any
speciﬁed face lattice is diﬃcult: this “algorithmic Steinitz problem” is as
diﬃcult as the solution of general polynomial systems over the reals; see [96,
p. 407]. (The inverse problem, the complete description of the face lattice
of a given polytope, is not trivial either: see Lecture 1 and Exercise 9.0).
 G.M. Ziegler, Lectures on Polytopes, Graduate Texts in Mathematics 152,   
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4613-8431-1_10, © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2007 
 
291
